༄༅།།བོད་ཀྱི་ནང་བསྟན་དཔེ་ཚོགས་ལྟེ་གནས།།
Tibetan Buddhist Resource Center
Text Scan Input Form - Title Page
Work:
11KG12880
W1KG12782
2003404423
ImageGroup:
ISBN:
LCCN:
SBM: *
13406787, 4901906100
13406787, 4901906100
Title:
བོད་དང་ཧི་མཱ་ལ་ཡར་ཡོད་པའི་བོན་དགོན་དང་ལྷ་ཁང་གི་སྤྱི་བཤད།
bod dang hi mA la yar yod pai bon dgon dang 1ha khang gi spyi bshad/
Author:
མཁར་རྨེའུ་བསམ་གཏན།
mkhar rme'u bsam gtan/
n/a
Descriptor:
Original Publication:
senri ethnological reports;38
Place:
osaka
Publisher:
the national museum of ethnology
2003
Date:
Volume:
Total Volumes:
TBRC Pages:
Introductory Pages:
In/a
Text Pages:
Scanning Information:
n/a
n/a
Scanned at Tibetan Buddhist Resource Center, 150 West 17th St, New York City, NY
10011, US. Comments: 9/2012



Senri Ethnological
Reports
A Survey of
Bonpo Monasteries and
Temples in Tibet and
the Himalaya
Bon Studies 7
Edited by
Samten G. Karmay
Yasuhiko Nagano
National Museum of Ethnology
Osaka 2003



The National Museum of Ethnology
Senri Expo Park, Suita
Osaka 565-8511, Japan
2003 by The National Museum of Ethnology
All rights reserved. Printed in Japan
Publication Data
A Survey of Bonpo Monasteries and Temples in Tibet and the Himalaya / Samten G. Karmay and
Yasuhiko Nagano
Includes bibliographical references and Index.
ISBN 4-901906-10-0 C3039 ISSN 1340-6787
1. Tibet. 2. Bon Religion.
1. Karmay, Sumten G. II. Nagano, Yasuhiko
Book design by B2 Design, Kyoto, Japan
Typeset by Yubunsha Co., Ltd., Osaka, Japan
orary Oy
11111
From the
betan
adhist
TBRO
Ources
"
Gene
*****
1519
**11110



Preface
Yasuhiko Nagano
This volume contains the results of our field research concerning Bonpo
monasteries, hermitages and people in Tibet and the Himalayas, supported by the
Ministry of Education, Japan.
Bon is one of the pre-Buddhist religions in Tibet. By the term "pre-Buddhist
here I mean that it existed in Tibet before Buddhism was imported into the area
and that it has survived till the present time. Although various definitions of Bon
have been proposed, it could properly be said that, in Bonpo culture, we perceive
something essential or basic, that has pervaded Tibetan culture from ancient times to
the present day. Bon is therefore an important cultural substratum in Tibet.
Unfortunately, however, the study of Bon culture has lagged far behind that
of Buddhism. This tendency is salient all over the world, especially in Japan. To
improve this situation, a Bon culture research project was launched in 1996 with
funding for joint research from the National Museum of Ethnology, Japan, and a
subsidy from the Ministry of Education for overseas survey. Most of these funds
were allocated to the development of the groundwork for research, to a field survey
of the actual conditions of Bon culture, to an interim symposium and to publication
of our results.
The development of groundwork for research included the Bonpo Canon (the
Kangyur and Katen texts, plus rare texts not included in the Kangyut or in the
Katen), iconographical materials, F. W. Thomas' research notes on the Zhangzhung
language kept in the British Library, and so on. An interdisciplinary symposium
was held in the summer of 1999 at the National Museum of Ethnology, Osaka, and
leading scholars from a wide range of fields attended it, presenting papers on various
topics related to Bon religion. Those who participated in fieldwork for the research
project were also invited to attend the symposium so that they could present their
findings. Most of the papers read at the symposium were published in 2000. It is my
hope that the publication of those papers has set a new standard in the study of Bon.
The results of the field survey of the actual conditions of Bon culture are
presented in this volume. Such concrete and detailed descriptions of the Bonpo
monasteries and people, based on extensive fieldwork, have never before appeared
since the beginning of Tibetology, and it is my belief that this publication will prove
to be a significant milestone for future studies of Tibetan culture.
In the autumn of 1995, Dr. Samten G. Karmay and I consulted together on how
to carry out field research into the Bon religious establishments and drew up a careful
questionnaire. That framework is described in Dr. Samten Karmay's "Introduction".



Needless to say, the history and present conditions of monasteries, temples and
hermitages are included. The framework also includes the exact location of each
monastery and its economic state as well as its relationship to local society. Many
monasteries involved do not in fact appear on maps and, even if they do, we often
find discrepancies between the actual locations and their names. We determined,
therefore, to locate the places by GPS measurement. The actual economic state of a
monastery and its ties with the locality and/or the lay world have keenly interested
scholars, but these matters are extremely difficult for non-Bonpos to approach.
Five authors spent a lot of time and exerted themselves both academically
and physically in doing fieldwork on each monastery. Many of monasteries are not
easily accessible because of poor transportation; others are not constantly occupied
by anyone and the authors had to make several trips to complete their fieldwork and
obtain information. Almost all areas have been covered, but particular parts of the
southeastern TAR were left unstudied.
The field survey of the actual conditions of Bon culture was conducted in TAR,
Tibetan areas in China, India and Nepal. Thanks to the positive support of the China
Center for Tibetan Studies, Beijing, the Tibet Academy of Social Sciences, Lhasa,
and the Triten Norbutse Bonpo Educational Centre, Kathmandu, many valuable
descriptions were collected, previously unknown to scholars. Without their generous
consideration, this volume would never have seen the light of day.
After several rounds of editing, the descriptions included in this volume have
come to be of great use to students of Tibetan culture.
I would like to offer my deepest gratitude to the Ministry of Education,
Japan, and the National Museum of Ethnology, my present working place, for their
continued support of this project
The following is a list of publications issued or soon to be issued in the same
series as this volume (Senri Ethnological Reports):
Bon Studies 1
Mandalas of the Bon Religion
Editors: Tenzin Namdak, Musashi Tachikawa and Yasuhiko Nagano
Bon Studies 2
New Horizons in Bon Studies
Editors: Samten G. Karmay and Yasuhiko Nagano
Bon Studies 3
New Research on Zhangzhung and Related Himalayan Languages
Editors: Yasuhiko Nagano and Randy LaPolla



Bon Studies 4
A Catalogue of the New Collection of Bonpo Katen Texts
Editors: Samten G. Karmay and Yasuhiko Nagano
Bon Studies 5
A Catalogue of the New Collection of Bonpo Katen Texts --- Indices
Editors: Samten G. Karmay and Yasuhiko Nagano
[A revised version of Bon Studies 4 and 5 is available on CD-ROM.]
Bon Studies 6
The Call of the Blue Cuckoo
Editors: Samten G. Karmay and Yasuhiko Nagano
Bon Studies 7
The present volume
Bon Studies 8
A Catalogue of the Bonpo Kangyur (tentative title)
Editors: Per Kvaerne, Dan Martin, Namgyal Nyima, Tsering Thar, Dondrup Lhagyal,
Tseyang Changngoba, Donatella Rossi and Yasuhiko Nagano
Bon Studies 9
The Khyungpo Collection of Bonpo Thangkas tentative title)
Editors: Musashi Tachikawa, Per Kvaerne, Tenzin Namdak and Yasuhiko Nagano
Bon Studies 10
Research Notes on the Zhangzhung Language (tentative title)
Author: F. W. Thomas
Editors: Tsuguhito Takeuchi, B. Quessel and Yasuhiko Nagano
Bon Studies 11
The Bon Tradition in Gyalrong
Editors: Samten G. Karmay and Yasuhiko Nagano
Bon Studies 12
The Amdo Rebkong Collection of Bonpo Thangkas (tentative title)
Editors: Alag Bongya, Musashi Tachikawa and Yasuhiko Nagano
It should also be noted that Saujanya Publications, Delhi, have generously
offered a reprint plan and that this publisher has already reprinted Bon Studies 1.
Since this series is a governmental publication and its circulation is rather limited,



this offer seems very helpful in accelerating Bon studies.
Finally, let me express my heartfelt appreciation to Dr. Samten G. Karmay, who
has consistently been encouraging me in Bon studies and cooperating as a general
editor, and to Mrs. Satoko Suzuki for her practical help.



Table of Contents
Preface
Yasuhiko Nagano .....
Introduction
Samten G. Karmay.........
List of the monasteries surveyed..............
Bonpo monasteries and temples in Central Tibet
Dondrup Lhagyal.......
Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
Phuntso Tsering Sharyul.
Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
Tsering Thar..
..................... 247
Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
Charles Ramble and Marietta Kind ............. ...................
Terms of governing system and duties in monasteries ........
Index .........................
.................................................................................... 759



UIGHUR AUTONOMOUS REGION
# SR 1
A K
INNER MONGOLIA
19
Dunhuang
Hotan
Haixi A.S.
Haibei A.S.
NINGXIA
KASHMIR
Golmud
QINGHAI
D
Rutog
GANSU
Xining If
/ Chapchat
hou
Hainan A.S.
Lanzhou
Repkongs.
Huangnan Labrang
A.S. Gannan A.S.
Mt. Amnye Machen
Golok A.S.
Ngari Area
Nakchu Area
Yushu A.S.
Haixi A.S.
Ngari
Cone
TIBET AUTONOMOUS REGION
Ga K
Tsaparang
Mt. Kailash
Dore کہ
Dzorge
Jekundo
Simla
Sershu
Dangra
Lake
Purang
Nakchu
U Chamdo Area
Chamdo
Ngaba
Sungchu
Ngaba A.S.
Derge
•
Barkham
Kantse N
Nyarong
Tawu
Chengdu
SICHUAN
- TSA NG
900
Н
Dolpo
Mustang
Mustang
NEPAL
Lhasa
Shigatse Area
Bathang Kantse A.S.
O
Shigatse.
Nyingtri Area
SongPO
Nyingtri
Gartok}
Lithang
Dartsendo
py
II
Southern Area
Gartok
INDIA
Tingripanya
Gyantse
O
Dzayul
Kathmandu
Decher
SMuli Cty.
Phari
Tsona
Thimphu
BHUTAN
Muli
Muli
Gyaltang
Dechen A.S.
GUIZHOU
0
100
200
300 400
CE
500 km
MYANMAR
YUNNAN
OY. Nagano & S. G. Karmay 2003
(BANGLADESH



Introduction
Samten G. Karmay
This volume is concerned with a general survey of monasteries, temples,
hermitages of the Bon religion, known as gYung drung Bon, that have survived or
recently been rebuilt in Tibet, Tibetan inhabited regions in China proper as well as
the Himalayan regions.
The monastic system in the Bon tradition has a long history. It goes back at
least to the eleventh century. However, Bon tradition itself traces it back to a period
beyond the eleventh century, but this claim remains to be proved.
Although the monasticism of the Bon tradition owns its inspiration to Buddhism,
the Bonpo already had established it when the Buddhists began to re-establish their
monasteries in the eleventh century. This begins with the six Buddhist monks who
returned to Central Tibet from Amdo where they were ordained by Bla chen dGe ba
gsal (891-975) according to the Deb ther sngon po by 'Gos Lo tsa ba gZhon nu dpal
(1392-1481).
In the case of the Bon tradition it started with the disciples of gShen chen Klu
dga'. Bonpo chronology ascribes this master to 996-1035. He is also thought to be
contemporary with Lo tsa ba Rin chen bzang po (958-1055). The disciples of gShen
chen Klu dga' established various religious centers, such as temples, hermitages and
monasteries.
One of the disciples of this master, Bru chen Nam mkha' g-yung drung, is
credited with founding a temple in 1072 near the estate of his own family called Bru,
a few kilometers to the east of Shigatse and north of the gТsang po river, Central
Tibet. It soon developed into a monastery called gYas rudBen sa kha. The monastery
was mainly maintained by the family by providing its abbots. While one brother
ensured the line of the family, another would devote himself to religious life and
often became the abbot of the monastery. In such an establishment, the monastery is
usually considered as belonging to the family as the term dgon bdag, the owner of
the monastery indicates. The ownership always remained the same even when the
abbot was not a member of the family,
dBen sa kha came to be considered as the primary source of the monastic
tradition among the Bonpo until the fourteenth century. It was an important centre
of learning and produced a number of noted writers. Their works became classics
for monastic learning in later centuries. The monastery, however, was destroyed by a
flood in 1386. With the disappearance of this monastery a period of monastic culture
of the Bon tradition came to an end.
A new era began with the foundation of two monasteries also in Central Tibet.



These will be briefly described here as they had a tremendous influence over other
monastic establishments that are surveyed by the four authors in this volume.
One of the monks of dBen sa kha Monastery just referred to was Shes rab rgyal
mtshan. He was the head of one of the colleges of the monastery, but he was absent
from the monastery when it was washed away by a flood. He was on a visit to his
mother in Gyal rong, eastern Tibet.
On the way back to Central Tibet, news of the flood reached him when he
was in Dar rtse mdo. Discouraged, he withdrew himself into a retreat, but there
he received good signs that encouraged him to resume his journey on foot back to
Central Tibet. He is said to have found various objects in the ruins such as books and
musical instruments that belonged to the destroyed monastery. With these objects,
taken as an auspicious sign, he founded a monastery on the southern slope of Mount
sMan ri in 1405. The monastery was called bra shis sman ri (No. 1). It is located
in a rather secluded place, up the same valley where dBen sa kha Monastery was
located.
With the help of his disciple Rin chen rgyal mtshan, a whole system in
accordance with the Bru tradition of dBen sa kha Monastery was re-established with
a strong emphasis on the need for abstention from alcoholic drink and the observance
of celibacy as the principal guideline of the monastic discipline. These rules are laid
out in the boa 'vig, the monastic code and it was read out to the assembly in a solemn
ceremony by the disciplinarian once a year. The discipline of the new monastery thus
became the model for most Bonpo monasteries in later centuries. It was hard to stick
to the rules set out in the boa 'vig of sMan ri Monastery, but it became an established
tradition and most monasteries that were founded later were expected to follow its
tradition.
However, there were other monasteries which practised different ritual
traditions such as the gShen lugs, the “Tradition of gShen" or Zhu lugs, the "Tradition
of Zhu", but all were expected to follow the same monastic discipline.
The Bonpo were often characterized as being lovers of women and wine
(chang nag la dga'ba) by the Buddhists, especially the dGe lugs monastics. In
fact, in certain places the members of a monastery or temple were of what one
calls ser khim, that is a kind of "semi-monk" who observes only a few out of the
many monastic vows. They usually spent a certain amount of time in the year in the
monastery and the rest of the time at home in the village helping do household work.
The ser khyim were not necessarily married men nor angags pa.
The founder of Man ri Monastery bears the title mNyam med, the
"Incomparable One", but in the colophons of books he wrote he describes himself
as gShen gyi drang srong, the "monk who follows the gShen", i.e. gShen rab Mi bo.
Amongst his writings there is a detailed commentary of the 'Dul ba kun brus. It is
entitled 'Dul 'grel 'phrul gyi sgron me. The 'Dul ba kun brus (Kvaerne 1974: T. 7)



is a classic text devoted to the monastic discipline composed in verse by Me ston
Shes rab 'od zer (1058-1132). It is these two works that serve as the textual basis of
Bonpo monasticism.
Man ri Monastery remained small and modest in its development as its founder
had wished. Before he died, he appointed his disciple Rin chen rgyal mtshan as
the abbot of the monastery. Thus Rin chen rgyal mtshan bears the title rGyal tshab,
the "Apostle". However, the successors of Rin chen rgyal mtshan were elected by
secret lot from among the qualified monks. There were thirty-two abbots spanning
over five hundred and sixty years till around 1966. Its uneasy access did not help it
become a great centre, but it was highly esteemed for its strict practice of monastic
rules. Per Kvaerne (1970) was the first Western scholar to devote an article to the
administration of this monastery. The Monastery was plundered and finally totally
destroyed during the Cultural Revolution, 1966-1976. As of 2002, it still has not
been rebuilt.
gYung drung gling Monastery (No.2) was the second in importance to sMan
ri Monastery in Central Tibet. It was founded by sNang ston Zla ba rgyal mtshan
(6.1796) of Amdo origin in 1834. Although the monastery was a relatively recent
establishment in comparison with Man ri, it became more prosperous and influential
particularly in north-eastern Tibet. The monastery is located on a small plateau at
the foot of Mount 'Olha rGyal bzang to the north of the g Tsang po river facing the
sTag gru kha ferry. It is on the axis of routes leading to Lhasa, Shigatse, Gyantse
and Byang thang, the northern plateau. This explains in part the monastery's rapid
development. For this strategic reason, the monastery was used as the base of a large
People's Liberation Army garrison in the area during the Cultural Revolution. It
therefore remained intact till the very last days of the revolution. At the beginning
of 1980s, permission was given with funding to rebuild it, but it remains largely
symbolic and the temples that have been rebuilt were totally empty when I visited
them in 1997.
Persecution and destruction
The history of Bon monasteries is of a history of either sectarian persecution or
wanton destruction by a foreign invader. The Bonpo religious establishments never
had any political ambition and consequently there is no record of their holding any
position that had a political significance. This might explain in part why the Bon
religion and its monastic tradition somehow survived through the centuries in Tibet
in spite of the Bon religion being a non-Buddhist creed among the 80% Buddhist
population in Central Tibet.
From the eleventh to the fourteenth centuries, no record of general persecution
is found apart from a few disputes between two individuals or two religious
communities. On the contrary, there are a number of examples of showing good will



towards one another. Even after the fourteenth century, a certain number of Bonpo
monks of sMan ri Monastery went to study philosophy at Sa skya pa monasteries till
gYung drung gling Monastery managed to establish its own mishan nvid studies in
the eighteenth century.
In the seventeenth century, Tibet was seething with religio-politcal conflicts.
The rise to political power of the Fifth Dalai Lama (1617-1682) in 1642 calmed
down the turmoil in the country. His reign was marked by a remarkable period of
peace and tolerance. In 1664, the Fifth Dalai Lama issued a decree appointing De
srid Sangs rgyas rgya mtsho (1658-1705) as the Regent of Tibet and in the decree
the Fifth Dalai Lama recognised Bon as one of Tibet's official religions (Richardson
1998: 441). This tradition was belatedly revived by the Fourteenth Dalai Lama in
India only at the beginning of 1980s. There was therefore no notable persecution
during the reign of the Fifth Dalai Lama. On the contrary, the fact that he was deeply
interested in the Bon religion is proved by the abundant references to Bon in his
autobiography, the Dukula'i gos bzang.
The Regent gives a list of monasteries that were founded by the Fifth Dalai
Lama. Amongst these is Sog Tsan dan dgon which he mentions rather obliquely
saying that it was originally Karma bka' brgyud pa, but no mention is made
regarding whether it had any connection with Bon (Vaidurya ser po, p.405).
However, according to the Nag chu sa khul gvi dgon sde khag gi lo rgvus (p.351), in
1640, during the military campaign of Gushri Khan in Khams, a number of Bonpo
and bka' brgyud pa monasteries suffered destruction. Later in 1668, the Fifth Dalai
Lama ordered a de lugs pa monastery to be built for the people of the Sog district,
east of Nag chu kha, as compensation for the large Bonpo monastery called Sog
g Yung drung gling, four small bka' brgyud pa monasteries and one small convent
called Tsan dan dgon that had been destroyed by the Gushri Khan's troops. The
new de lugs pa monastery was called Sog dGaldan 'phel rgyas gling, but it was
normally known as Sog Tsan dan dgon. However, it was not built on the ruins of Sog
g Yung drung gling as the Bonpo often imply.
However, the Regent seems to have forgotten the very tolerant religious policy
that his master maintained throughout his reign. In 1686 under his order, all the Bon
religious establishments in the Ser tsha district in Khyung po, Khams, converted to
dGe lugs pa. Four dGe lugs pa monasteries were then founded for the Ser tsha people
in four different places: dGa'Idan bkra shis gling in 'Bro rdzong; da' ldan thar dod
gling in Ga ngal; da' ldan skabs gsum gling in Ri dmar and dGa' Idan dpal 'byor
gling in Phu dmar. A Lama from Rong po dga' Idan rab brtan dgon founded by the
Fifth Dalai Lama in 1668, was appointed to be in charge of the new monasteries
(Vaidurya ser po, p.459), Rong po da' ldan rab brtan dgon is usually known as
Rong po Rab brtan dgon. Rong po is a place in the Sog district. The Regent does
not mention the names of the Bon religious establishments that he had converted



and I have seen no other records mentioning them. It is not clear why the Regent had
implemented such a drastic policy of religious conversion by force in this particular
place. There were so many other places in the same region where the Bon religion
was followed, but no similar action seems to have been taken.
He states: "in Khyung po gSer tsha people believe strongly in Bon (khyung po
gser /ser/ tsha khul du bon lugs la dad 'dun che ha..) and if the gYung drung Bon
religion is practised properly,... (citation of a sutra) one cannot stop them, but during
the day the practitioners stay in monasteries. There they fight over the offerings that
were made by the faithful just like vultures over corpses. During the night they go
to villages and sleep with women. So what they do is very serious sin...(citation of
texts). Thinking for the benefit of myself and them, - since they are Bonpo just in
name, in reality they behave like laymen - , I had them converted to dGe lugs pa"
(Vaidurya ser po, p. 459).
It is hard to believe that such was the real reason for which the Regent caused
the people of Ser tsha to change their faith. It seems that he was not against the
religion itself as such, but rather against the Ser tsha people who probably resisted
the policies of his de lugs pa dominated government in the area. Whatever it
may be, this had set a precedent of forced conversion of monasteries belonging not
only to the Bon tradition but also to other Buddhist orders. Each time there was a
forced conversion the name of the new dGe lugs pa monastery began with the word
dga'Idan or dge Idan following the example of the names of the new monasteries
founded by the Fifth Dalai Lama.
Apart from the method of forced conversion, other strategies were used to
gain a foothold among a people whose religious tradition was not dGe lugs pa. This
consisted of recognizing a child as a reincarnation in a non-dGe lugs pa family.
That was what happened to the Bru family which was very prestigious and a strong
bastion of Bon as mentioned earlier. The family seat was located to the north of
g Tsang po and a few kilometers to the east of Shigatse. It was the Fifth Dalai Lama,
who in order to institute the reincarnation series of Panchen Lama, chose a child of
the Bru family as the reincarnation of his spiritual master Panchen Blo bzang chos
rgyan (1567-1662). The child became the Panchen Blo bzang ye shes (1663-1737).
but the Fifth Dalai Lama made sure that the family continued to adhere to its own
religion. However, another Panchen Lama, bsTan pa'i dbang phyug (1854-1882) was
born again in the family. This time, it was the end of the family's own religion. Its
seat became known as 'Khrungs gzhi, the "Base of births" and was made as an estate
of bkra shis lhun po Monastery.
Another underhand method was used for enriching one's own establishments. In
the nineteenth century, it was the intervention by bra shis Ihun po Monastery in a
dispute between two branches of the gShen family located in the Dar sding village, a
few kilometers to the west of Shigatse. The intervention resulted in properties of one



of the two families being confiscated and given to a de lugs pa monastery nearby
(Dondrup Lhagyal, 2000: 444). These are just a few examples of religio-political
persecution of a sort under the domination of the de lugs pa government. The
Bonpo themselves unfortunately have rarely committed these invents to writing.
However, the tendency for non-dGe lugs pa religious orders to come under
persecution was further intensified due to two developments: foreign interference
in the internal affairs of Tibet and the gaining of the upper hand by an ultra
fundamentalist section among the dGe lugs pa monasteries and in government
clerical circles.
Foreign interference
At the beginning of the seventeenth century, the Jungar tribes of the Ili district
in western Mongolia began to expand their empire. When they became a threat to the
Manchu rule over China, the emperor Kangxi had to appeal to the Fifth Dalai Lama
(1617-1682) to exert his influence over them since they were of recent conversion
to the dGe lugs pa school. Tibetan authorities in Lhasa maintained good relations
with them. However, after the death of the Fifth Dalai Lama, the Manchus began to
have political interests in Tibet. De srid Sangs rgyas rgya mtsho was therefore in
collusion with the Jungars in a design to outdo the policies of the Emperor Kangxi
concerning Tibet. In 1717, they accordingly began to make incursions into Tibet
intended partly to forestall any aggression from the Manchus and on the pretext
of defending dGe lugs pa interests. As their hordes made their way into Tibet,
they attacked Bonpo monasteries that they found in their way, looting, burning
and murdering monks. As a people of recent conversion, they seem to have had
the conviction that they should ransack other religious establishments in Tibet that
were non-dGe lugs pa, such as those of the rNying ma pa and Bonpo. The rNying
ma pa suffered particularly at their hands in Central Tibet as they executed several
eminent Nying ma pa masters, like Lochen Dharmasri (1654-1717) amongst others,
for no valid reasons. Many a Bonpo establishment, such as gShen Dar sding, had
experienced the plunder of the Jungars. From the accounts of Phuntso Tsering, it is
clear that they pillaged and destroyed at least six Bonpo monasteries (Nos. 15, 19,
22, 54, 27, 34). The Jungars were finally expelled by the Tibetans with the help of
the Manchu army.
Sectarian persecution
The dGe lugs pa government in Tibet had a powerful supporter. Since 1720
till 1911 the Manchu influence over Tibet was firmly established and the dGe lugs
pa saw this foreign power as their cherished patron which it was. At the same
time, a certain segment among the de lugs pa began to claim that they were the
upholders of the dGe lugs pa teachings as being the most authentic ones as taught



by the Buddha. This of course implied that other Buddhist schools in Tibet and not
to mention the Bonpo held false views. The movement came often to be closely
associated with the Shugs Idan cult. The deity's antipathy to non-dGe lugs pa
teachings is all the more the object of praise in the ritual texts devoted to this deity.
Amongst other places I should mention here are two areas where this particular
movement was very active and where conflicts between the Bonpo and the de lugs
pa establishments were particularly fierce. The Sog district contained two important
dGe lugs pa monasteries, Sog Tsan dan dgon and Rong po Rab brtan dgon as referred
to earlier. It was in this area that Pha bong kha ba bDe chen snying po (1878-1941)
of Sera Monastery was active early the twentieth century. It was he who revived
the cult of Shugs ldan in spite of opposition to it by the Thirteenth Dalai Lama. In a
forthcoming article I have dealt in some detail with his activities in this area and the
revolt of the so-called "Thirty-nine Tribes of Hor" of Bonpo obedience against the
Tibetan government.
The other place, where the relations between the two faiths were similarly
strained, was Gro mo (Chumbi Valley) in southern Tibet. Around 1897 the most
active dGe lugs pa master in this area was Ngag dbang skal bzang, also of Se ra
Monastery. He was commonly known as Gro mo dGe bshes Rinpoche and was
a disciple and friend of Pha bong kha ba bDe chen snying po. The cult of Shugs
Idan which he set up in this place was based in Dung dkar Monastery. The Bonpo
monastery in Gro mo known as Pus mo sgang (No.8) had a perpetual struggle with
Dung dkar for its existence. The conflict between the two monasteries had inspired
the composition of a four-line praise to the deity in the propitiatory text by Pha bong
kha ba be chen snying po as follows:
"In the barbarous land where the bad tradition of gShen rab is upheld,
You made flourish the good path that is complete and faultless
With your rapid action of four kinds and many other omens,
I praise you who are the guide of living beings!"
(gshen rabs(rab) lugs ngan 'dzin pa'i mtha ' 'khob tu
las bzhi i rtags mtshan rno myur du ma yis/
tshang la ma nor lam bzang rgyas mdzad pa'i/
skye rgu 'i 'dren par gyur pa khyod la bstod/).
In 1967 Yongs dzin Khri byang Blo bzang ye shes, the late tutor of the
Fourteenth Dalai Lama, wrote a commentary on the propitiatory eulogy to the deity
just quoted entitled Gyal chen bstod 'grel (folio 138b). In this work he explains
that the phrase "barbarous land" refers to Gro mo and thanks to the four actions
of the deity" the dGe lugs pa tradition was firmly established there. The region was
mainly inhabited by a Bonpo population until the de lugs pa penetrated there only



in the nineteenth century, Dung dkar Monastery was tacitly supported by the Tibetan
government in its hostility, but Pus mo syang seemed to have miraculously survived
till the days of the Cultural Revolution.
However, there is yet another region, Gyal rong where relations between the
two faiths were in constant struggle. The exact date of the Buddhist penetration there
is not known. Vairocana, a Tibetan Buddhist monk of the eighth century is said to
have resided there, but this is more of a myth than history. In the fifteenth century,
Tsha kho Ngag dbang gragspa, a disciple of Tsong kha pa (1357-1519) and a native
of the Tsha kho district, north of Gyal rong, returned to his native country after
studying in Central Tibet. He is said to have made a vow to erect 108 monasteries
in his native land in the presence of his master. He certainly founded some dGe
lugs pa monasteries in Tsha kho and he is said to have used magic against the
Bonpo to overcome the latter's opposition to his efforts in conversion (mDo smad
chos 'byung, p.774). The de lugs pa expansion in the area was slow and difficult.
However, in the second half of the 19th century, a child in the family of the local
chief, Cog tse, was chosen to be the reincarnation of Byang rtse Blo bzang Ihun grub,
the 74th Throne-holder of Tsong kha pa in da Idan Monastery. The local chief, the
Cog tse rgyal po, "king of Cog tse" was powerful in his own right in the place. As
the child grew up, the dGe lugs pa influence in the family increased, too. In 1874,
he converted 'Bar kham g Yung drung gling, one of the oldest Bon monasteries in the
area, to de lugs pa and went so far as to erase its old Bon mural paintings and paint
them over with the deities of the dGe lugs pa school. (Barkham ['Bar khams] is now
the administrative seat of the Autonomous Prefecture' of Aba (rNga bal in Sichuan.)
This conversion of the monastery provoked a strong reaction from the people of Shar
khog, the next easternly region of the Tsha kho district. A local religious war was
fought between a section of the people in Cog tse who supported the conversion and
the people of Shar khog who wanted to save the monastery as Bonpo. The people of
Shar khog were ultimately defeated, but they took the lama of the monastery to Shar
khog where he is said to have settled down.
However, the Bonpo people in Gyal rong, had to face much more serious
hostility in the 18th century. Not only had they to fight on a religious front but also
a political one. They resisted for nearly thirty years against the Manchu invasion,
supported and encouraged by the influential dGe lugs pa lama Kyang skya Rol
pa'i rdo rje (1717-1786) who had then a high position at the Manchu imperial court
of Qianlong. In 1760 the Manchu army finally won the war capturing bSod nams
dbang 'dus, the king of Rab brtan. He was led to Beijing together with more than
one thousand people as war prisoners. The king was finally executed. Five horses
were attached to his head, hands and feet and then let pull in different directions, a
privilege kept for kings in Manchu punishment customs. gYung drung Iha steng, the
royal monastery was partially destroyed and converted to de lugs pa and was given



the name dGa'Idan bstan 'phel gling. de lugs pa monks were summoned from
Bras spungs Monastery to administer it. Qianlong issued an edict forbidding the
practice of the Bon religion in the area. What is peculiar about this piece of history
is that the monastery was totally destroyed during the Cultural Revolution. However,
around 1980 the Sichuan government decided to reinstate it for a reason not known
to me and even provided funds so that the local Bonpo people could begin to rebuild
it as one of their own monasteries (No.187).
Surveying of the monasteries
This is the first time such a work of surveying of the Bonpo monasteries has
ever been carried out. It was intended to cover as wide an area as possible, but given
the vast geographic extent of Tibet's cultural boundaries the idea sounded very
daunting indeed. Nevertheless, well supplied with the financial means, our colleague,
Professor Yasuhiko Nagano was determined to carry it out in the programme of
the Bon Culture Research Project at the National Museum of Ethnology and the
four authors, who conducted the survey, spared no efforts in getting the intended
work done. Moreover, the three Tibetan scholars, who mainly did the surveying
in Tibet and Tibetan inhabited areas in China proper, are all acquainted with the
cultural history of the Bon tradition and that helped them enormously in doing their
fieldwork.
We have thus Dondrup Lhagal who surveyed the monasteries in the provinces
of dBus and gTsang, Phuntso Tsering covered mainly the northern plateau, but also
Chab mdo as well as the mNga' ris regions; Tsering Thar on the other hand took the
survey in Amdo, parts of Khams and Gyal rong. Charles Ramble later joined by
Marietta Kind attended to the monasteries in Nepal and India effectively covering
the Himalayan region. Thus 233 religious establishments mainly monasteries, but
also hermitages and temples were all briefly examined. However, this does not mean
that every surviving or rebuilt monastery in Tibet was surveyed. Certain places such
as Tshaba rong in Khams have been left out. It is possible that still other places were
not covered
One of the biggest difficulties that the surveyors faced was that only a few
of the places were within easy reach. The majority of monasteries were found in
totally isolated places. To reach them required enormous physical exertion often in
unfavorable weather, because many of them were located in places where there were
no roads. If there were roads no transport was readily available. So the surveyors
were often obliged to either ride on horseback or walk for days to see just one
monastery or a hermitage at a time. It often happened that when a place was reached,
no one was present and so the same journey had to be made twice.
There was another difficulty much more serious than the problem of
inaccessibility. It was the scanty or simply non-existent information due to the



systematic destruction of the religious establishments and national monuments
carried out during the so-called Cultural Revolution that spanned over ten years from
1966 to 1976. The criticism leveled against monuments such as fortresses were that
they represented feudal society whereas monasteries were the basis of "superstition"
(rmong dad).
The sporadic looting and burning committed by the Jungars seemed so
insignificant when one compares their action to what the Chinese and their Tibetan
collaborators did. This was purely robbery, carefully thought out and well organized
with the intention of eradicating Tibet's cultural identity in its own land. The mere
word destruction does not seem sufficient to convey what kind of process the
action involved, because the manner in which it was executed was so thorough and
effective that in many cases not even traces were left. It is known that more than six
thousand monasteries of both Buddhist and Bonpo perished during the period. Only
a fraction of this number have survived.
It is therefore perhaps necessary to mention in a few words how the
expropriation of property and demolition of the monastic buildings were orchestrated
by armed hordes of the Red Guards with terror, threat, humiliation, public criticism
and imprisonment for those who dared to resist.
As most of the monasteries and temples were centuries old, many were well
equipped with what they needed and their religious tradition required them to
possess. Much of the equipment was not actually all destroyed. It was simply
expropriated. In a monastery of modest size the assembly hall usually possessed
common effects such as archives, manuscripts, texts, thangka paintings, statues in
both gilt-bronze and clay, woodblocks for printing, musical instruments made of
various metals, tombs of abbots made of silver and gold with insets of precious
stones, mural paintings, draperies made of silk and embroidered, masks and
costumes for the 'cham dance, ritual objects made of silver, gold and brass, ritual
implements such as dagger and culinary utensils. Besides these effects of the
assembly hall, the residence of the head of the monastery and the individual monks
also normally possessed as private property, books, musical instruments and ritual
objects.
The process of dismantling was carried out methodically stage by stage. First
there was the removal of metal objects, followed by the wood work, books and
other items. When the building was entirely emptied of its contents, it was often
then detonated. However, in many cases, recorded documents that contained local
histories and annual events of the monasteries and above all books were privileged
targets of destruction. They were often brought out into the open air where they were
either torn or chopped into pieces or simply burned with the public made to look
on, but in certain cases some books were saved by being concealed in unsuspected
places. This was possible only when two copies of a book existed. In such a case,



when a book was ordered to be brought out for destruction, the other copy was
hidden away. Most of the expropriated property was secretly transported to China
Metal objects could either be used by melting them down or just kept for their
intrinsic value in the future.
The events mentioned explain in part why written information on any given
monastery had become so pitifully rare or practically non-existent in most cases. The
surveyors therefore had to turn to other sources of information for their surveying
work, but here too they faced incredible difficulties for the following reasons.
There were in fact two periods of monastic persecutions. In Amdo and parts of
Khams a number of monasteries perished in fact during the period of 1957 and 1958,
but the destruction of the majority of monasteries took place during the Cultural
Revolution. The events of the 1957-58 period is not officially admitted by the
Chinese authorities whereas the responsibility for the destruction during the Cultural
Revolution was later put on the shoulders of the "Gang of Four". In the 1960s and
1970s the monks, who witnessed and survived the onslaught of these events, were
roughly aged between twenty and thirty years. When the survey of monasteries
began to be conducted at the beginning of 1998 only few of these were still alive.
However, most of these were in no position to give any detailed oral information in a
coherent manner due to their old age. Nevertheless, some of these had written down
historical accounts of their own monasteries from their memories some of which the
surveyors were able to use.
Another destructive effect was the degradation of the Tibetan language in the
same period that had the effect on it being nearly extinguished as a medium for the
expression of Tibetan culture. Even in the aftermath of the revolution, only a few
Tibetans were capable or would take the risk of putting to use their own language.
At the beginning of the 1980s, however, there was a radical shift in Chinese
policies regarding the religious question. Tibetans, for the first time around 1980,
were allowed to rebuild some of the destroyed monasteries. In many cases, the
Chinese government even began to provide funds for this purpose particularly for
those monasteries strategically located. The restriction of the use of religious texts
was also lifted and the Chinese authorities even went on to encourage the publication
of Tibetan classical texts on a scale unknown in the pre-1959 era in Tibet. A number
of monasteries, it is true, have been rebuilt, but many of them only partially. The
primary motive for this reconstruction is obvious. It is to promote tourism. They
remain at best as deserted empty shells without the life of a real monastic tradition
The framework for the survey
In order to have the same approach and standard in surveying the religious
establishments, a guideline framework was worked out so that the authors could
follow it. All the surveyors have followed it except Phuntso Tsering, who as a



voluntary contributor, conducted the surveying in his own fashion, but his work,
nevertheless, does cover much the same ground as the others if only in some respects
his scope tended to be rather more limited
The framework, which is discussed below, consists of fourteen items. This
was designed not only to produce an assessment of the general situation of a given
monastery but also a review of the local population with regard to its importance to
the monastery as well as cultural interchanges between clerics and laymen. However,
in many instances information was simply not available and consequently not all of
the fourteen items could be supplied. This is particularly so in the case of temples
and hermitages. In the entries, items like 7 and particularly 10 are left out for the
reasons that no information was available.
1. Name
This heading shows the name of the monastery concerned. In Tibetan tradition
the names of religious establishments can vary considerably from one to another so
as often to cause confusion regarding whether one is referring to the same entity or
another.
2. Location
This item indicates the exact location of the establishment and the distance at
which it is found from the main town of a region as well as the condition of the road
leading to the place.
3. History
This section deals briefly with the history of the establishment.
4. Hierarchical system
In some monasteries such as sMan ri and g Yung drung gling, abbots were
elected by secret lot. The abbots are the supreme head of these monasteries, but
in other places the head of the monastery can be hereditary (gdung brgyud, gdung
'dzin), i.e. the monastery was founded by a member of a family in a nearby place
The family usually continues to provide a man to be the head of the monastery and
in this sense he is qualified as dgon bdag, "owner of the monastery". In this system,
other important figures within the same monastery often take turns to be the head of
the monastery and are in charge of the monastic affairs on a periodic basis under the
authority of the dgon bdag.
However, the system of headship varies from one place to another. The head
is often selected or appointed by general consent, but rarely did an individual monk
take a personal initiative to be the head of a monastery, but after 1959 the system of
appointing the head of a monastery had completely broken down. At the beginning
of the 1980s when monasteries were allowed to be rebuilt, either an individual or
a group of monks took the reconstruction initiative and as a result of this, in many



places the question of the head of a monastery remains unsettled to this day,
Under the authority of the head of a monastery, there are different functions
held by monks in varying positions. This hierarchical system also varies slightly
from monastery to monastery. There is a host of technical terms relating to the
monastic administration and duties and we have grouped them together under the
title of "Terms of governing system and duties in monasteries" in order to avoid the
repetition of their English translation in each account of the monasteries.
5. Current number of monks
After 1959, none of the monasteries regained their former status. On the
contrary, the number of monks and nuns is restricted and checked.
6. Current education
Under this heading, the current education of young monks and nuns in the
monasteries and convents is meant to be discussed, but as will be seen in many
places the situation is so desperate that there is hardly anything to be indicated. In
many cases, this item is left out since it simply does not exist in the monastery under
review.
7. Educational exchange
Before 1959, the educational exchange of young monks between monasteries
was considered as the key instrument for training young monks. In some respects,
this tradition is still kept up, but inevitably it tends to be less frequent and more
symbolic and in many monasteries it simply does not exist anymore.
8. Daily rituals
This heading is intended to show the daily rituals performed by the monks
collectively or in private, but it has been somewhat impracticable and complicated
for the surveyors to record them separately from the annual rituals performed in
assembly.
9. Annual rituals
Under this item a summary of the ritual events in the monasteries is given. This
is important since ritual traditions and their dates vary enormously from monastery
to monastery. In such a survey, no details concerning the identification of divinities
and ritual texts devoted to them could be provided. These obviously need separate
studies. One of the elements of these ritual events is the performance of various
'cham dances that takes place either as part of a ritual in private or as entertainment
for public spectators,
10. Books held in the monastery
In large monasteries, there used to be separate libraries, but in many cases the
books were simply kept as part of the three rten and so were usually found in the



chapels. As will be seen, during the Cultural Revolution archives, manuscripts and
books mostly perished, but in certain cases some brave people managed to hide
them away. It is still with much reluctance and fear that these hidden treasures are
gradually revealed. This explains why this section is left blank or not even entered in
many cases of the monasteries.
11. Income and expenses
Under this heading the income and expenses of the monasteries and monks
were intended to be discussed, but given the situation as we know it, there is little to
be said about them in the present circumstances.
12. Local community
Villages or nomadic tents clustered in the proximity of monasteries have always
been important for the monasteries as their main livelihood, but in descriptions
of Tibetan monasteries they are very often ignored. The surveyors were therefore
requested to give a fair amount of information about them. Such information in
fact gives an interesting idea whether the villagers regard themselves as still being
Bon believers, and as it has been found in certain places that they in fact do not
differentiate between Bon or Buddhism in clear cut terms. However, there are
still many villages in various regions whose populations declare themselves to be
followers of the Bon religion to this day.
13. Local festivals
Local festivals are either organized as common ones for both clergy and laymen
or separately. When laymen carry out their celebration the members of the clergy do
not normally participate in it, particularly when it is about the propitiation of local
deities. Moreover, one village does not even allow members of villages from other
regions to join with them. It is considered strictly private. On the other hand the
villagers almost always attend the ceremonies in monasteries if these are intended for
the public. Monasteries also often have their own local deities" and the members of
the clergy propitiate them normally on their own.
Another type of local festival takes the form of a pilgrimage which consists of
walking round a nearby sacred mountain (gnas ri). In this festival it is not only the
local people and clerics who join together in the celebration but also people from
neighbouring regions join in. The content of this celebration is purely religious. In
a forthcoming article I have tried to analyse the notions of the local deity and the
development of the gnas ri pilgrimage based on early documents such as Tibetan
Dunhuang manuscripts: "Concepts of Territorial organization and sacred sites". This
will appear in the Proceedings of the 8th Seminar of the International Association of
Tibetan Studies, Indiana University, Bloomington (July 25-31, 1998).



14. Occupation of the local people
Here it is intended that the life mode of the local people as farmers, nomads,
semi-nomads and traders should be indicated.
Editorial work
While Dondrup Lhagyal wrote his accounts of monasteries first in Tibetan
and then translated them into English himself, Phuntsog Tsering wrote his accounts
in Tibetan. Later an English translation of them was made by someone else. The
introduction and epilogue sections of his work could not be included in the present
volume due to the problem of length and relevance. However, Phuntso Tsering will
publish the whole of his original Tibetan version. Tsering Thar wrote his accounts
directly in English, but he intends to write a Tibetan version which he hopes to be
able to publish before long.
In all the three cases, a heavy and long editorial process has been involved
not only in order to make the English language acceptable but also to improve the
coherence of the work and make it presentable as scholarship.
However, in editing their works, the editors made strenuous efforts to keep
the gist of each account as far as possible, and each author is therefore directly
responsible for the accuracy and reliability of his own statements. An attempt is
also made to standardize the various approaches adopted by each author, but their
personal styles have largely been left as they are.
References
Dondrup Lhagyal
2000 Bonpo family lineages in Central Tibet. In Samten G. Karmay and Yasuhiko
Nagano (eds.) New Horizons in Bon Studies. Bon Studies 2 (Senri Ethnological
Reports 15), pp. 429-508. Osaka: National Museum of Ethnology
Karmay, Samten G
1998 The Arrow and the Spindle - Studies in History Myths, Rituals and Beliefs in
Tiber. Kathmandu: Mandala Book Point,
Kvaerne, Per
1970 Remarques sur l'administration d'un monastère bon-po. Journal Asiatique,
pp. 187-192
Richardson, Hugh
1998 The Fifth Dalai Lama's Decree Appointing Sangs-rgyas rgya-mtsho as Regent. In
Michael Aris (ed.) High Peaks, Pure Earth, Collected Writings on Tibetan History
and Culture, pp. 440-461. London: Serindia Publications.



References to Tibetan sources
sDe srid Sangs rgyas rgya mtsho (1653-1703)
1989 Vaidurya ser po, dGa'ldan chos 'byung vaidurya ser po. Krung go bod kyi shes rig
dpe skrun khang.
Brag dgon don mchog bstan pa rab rgyas (1801-1866)
1982 mDo smad chos 'byung, Yul mdo smad kyi ljongs su thub bstan rin po che ji liar dar
ha'lishul gsal bar brjod pa deb ther rgya misho. Kan su'u mi dpe skrun khang.
Khri byang Blo bzang ye shes (1901-1982)
n.d. Gyal chen bstod 'grel, dGe Idan bstan pa barung ba'i lha mchog sprul pa'i chos
rgyal chen po rdo rje shugs Idan risal gvi gsang gum rmad du byung ba'i rtogs
pa brjod pa'i gtam du bya ba dam can rgya mtsho dgyes pa'i rol mo. xylographic
edition. Gangtok.
1993 Bod ljongs nag chu sa khul gvi lo rgyus rig nas, Deb bdun pa: Nag chu sa khul gyi
dgon sde khag gi lo rgyus. Nag chu sa gnas srid gros lo rgyus rig gnas dpyad yig
khang.
"Gos gZhon nu dpal (1392-1481)
1949 Debther segon po (George. N. Roerich, The Blue Annals, Calcutta).
Me ston Shes rab 'od zer (1058-1139)
1960 "Dul ba kun las bus pa, Published by Sangye Tenzin and Samten Gyaltsen,
Kalimpong.
Acknowledgments
The editors would like to express their gratitude to Veronica Martin, Natsuko Miyake,
Francoise Pommaret and Howard Solverson who all gracefully helped us on various matters
for the present survey work. We owe a special thank to Satoko Suzuki who dealt with various
tasks with a great skill and patience in preparing the publication of this volume,



List of the monasteries surveyed



List of the monasteries surveyed
TIBET AUTONOMOUS REGION
dBus gtsang
(1) Man ri Monastery
(2) Ra lag 8 Yung drung gling Monastery
(3) Ri rgyal Monastery
(4) Ri zhing Monastery
(5) De chen sgang Hermitage
(6) bZang ri Monastery
(7) mKhar sna Monastery
(8) Pus mo sgang Monastery
Nye rong rdzong
(9) sNang gsal Monastery
(10) Chab mdo Monastery
(11) Sha ri Monastery
(12) rTing ngu Monastery
(13) gSang sngags rtse Hermitage
(14) Gyal po shel khur Hermitage
dPal mgon rdzong
(15) Shel phug Monastery
Nyi ma rdzong
(16) 'Om bu bSam gtan gling Monastery
(17) g Yu bun Monastery
(18) Phyug tsho Monastery
(19) Ser zhig Monastery
'Bri ru rdzong
(20) Sen tsha Monastery
(21) dGa'ri Monastery
(22) Klu mkhar Monastery
(23) ẢNgul kho Monastery
(24) Do rting Monastery
(25) gSa'mda' bon Monastery
sBra chen chen rdzong
(26) sPa tshang Monastery
(27) Lung dkar Monastery
(28) Gra rgyal Monastery
(29) A krong Hermitage
(30) Phur nag Monastery
(31) Klu phug Monastery
(32) sPu la Monastery



(33) Ma rong Monastery
(34) Khrom tshang Monastery
sTeng chen rdzong
(35) sTeng chen Monastery
(36) sTeng chen Hermitage
(37) Ko bo Monastery
(38) Ka legs g Yung drung gling Monastery
(39) sMon rgyal bla brang
(40) Nag ru Monastery
(41) Zhe nang Monastery
(42) Zhu tshang Monastery
(43) Ri dmar Monastery
(44) sGang ru Monastery
(45) Be sgo Monastery
(46) Gya sgo Monastery
(47) gNam steng Monastery
(48) Mu g-yad Monastery
(49) Yang rdzong Monastery
(50) Tsha ne Hermitage
(51) Ma rdzong Monastery
(52) Phug leb Monastery
(53) Kha spungs Nunney
(54) Mar khu Monastery
(55) Tse drug Monastery
(56) Wa dge Monastery
(57) Bya chen Monastery
(58) 1Ha lung Monastery
(59) g Yu mtsho Monastery
(60) Ga shel Monastery
(61) Re ne Monastery
(62) Ngang rdzong Monastery
(63) Jong phu Monastery
(64) Zla shel Monastery
(65) Bra hor Monastery
'Jo mda' rdzong
(66) sTag gzhi Monastery
(67) Zha zhi Monastery
(68) Dis bon Monastery
(69) sPong Monastery
(70) Bla khri Monastery
(71) dar tshang Monastery
20



List of the monasteries surveyed
IHo rong rdzong
(72) Khra rgan Monastery
(73) Lam Tha Monastery
(74) Bal tho Monastery
(75) Brag dkar Hermitage
mDzo sgang rdzong
(76) sTong mda' Monastery
(77) La ngu Monastery
(78) Sa bla Monastery
(79) Ri sna Monastery
(80) mDangs 'phyar Monastery
(81) Shug rdzong Monastery
(82) Rab pa Monastery
(83) dByibs pa Monastery
(84) ITag tsha Monastery
dPa'shod rdzong
(85) dBen mdzod Monastery
(86) 'Bur lung Monastery
(87) bkra shis rtse Monastery
Nying khri rdzong
(88) Srid rgyal Monastery
(89) sTag rtse gYung drung gling Monastery
mNga'ris
(90) Guru gyam Monastery
GANSU PROVINCE
The bo County
(91) gTso tshang Monastery
(92) God po Monastery
(93) Nags gong Monastery
(94) Chagsri Monastery
(95) Shing skam Monastery
(96) bSam 'grub Monastery
(97) gTerri Monastery
(98) Tswa ring Monastery
bSang chu County
(99) Tse zhig Monastery
21



MISHO SNGON (QINGHAI) PROVINCE
Reb gong County
(100) Bon brgya Monastery
(101) Bon brgya Temple
(102) Mag gsar Temple
(103) Gya mtsho dpal Temple
(104) Gad pa skya bo Temple
(105) gDong mgo Temple
(106) Ngo mo Temple
(107) Gyang ri Temple
(108) Gling rgya Temple
(109) Zho 'ong nyin tha Temple
(110) Dar grong Temple
(111) Khyung bo thang Temple
(112) Dong skam Temple
(113) Hor nag Temple
(114) sTong che Temple
(115) Khyung bo la ga Temple
gCan tsha County
(116) Zhwa khra Temple
rise khog County
(117) So nag Temple
Ba yan County
(118) To shes Temple
(119) Shar steng Temple
(120) Tong chung Monastery
(121) sTong chung Temple
Khri ka (Hua long) County
(122) Ser kywa Temple
(123) Khyung mo Monastery
(124) Gar ba Temple
(125) Bra ser Temple
(126) gZe ma Temple
(127) SKa rgya Temple
Mang ra (Gui nan) County
(128) 'Brog ru stong skor Temple
(129) 'Brog ru'i dPon tshang Tent Temple
(130) Bon brgya Tent Temple
(131) Bon brgya Khyung smon Monastery



List of the monasteries surveyed
Chab cha (Gong he) County
(132) Dung dkar Monastery
(133) ska gsar Temple
(134) A rig stong skor Temple
SICHUAN PROVINCE
sDe dge County
(135) Khro tshang Monastery
(136) Mon rgyal Monastery
(137) 'Bum mmad Monastery
(138) Shar rdza Hermitage
(139) Dza s Teng chen Monastery
(140) Zer 'phro Monastery
(141) 'Phen zhol Monastery
(142) Ri spun Monastery
(143) Thar bde Monastery
(144) Rab rgyal Monastery
dPal yul County
(145) Kha rag Monastery
(146) Zla 'od Monastery
(147) gTsug'od Monastery
(148) ICang lung Monastery
dKar mdzes County
(149) Gong lung Monastery
Nyag rong County
(150) Ye shes Monastery
(151) Gyal zhing Monastery
(152) Gong rgyal Monastery
(153) Klu 'bum Monastery
(154) La kha Monastery
(155) dBal khyung Monastery
(156) Brag dben Monastery
(157) Mi nub Monastery
Brag 'go County
(158) Ba mda' Monastery
(159) Gyal rong Monastery
(160) gZhung ring Monastery



rTa'u County
(161) bSam 'grub Monastery
(162) Chu mig Monastery
(163) du rdza Monastery
(164) Dam pa rang grol Monastery
Nyag chu County
(165) 'Du ra Monastery
(166) Thang sgang Monastery
Li thang County
(167) 'Gro mgon Monastery
Rong brag County
(168) Bye 'bur Monastery
(169) sPang gi lung Monastery
(170) gYung drung dar rgyas Monastery
(171) Khyung lung Monastery
(172) rJi ngo Monastery
(173) dPag bsam lhun 'grub Monastery
(174) Do zur mo Monastery
(175) Bya ti lo Monastery
brGyad zur County
(176) Mi rgod Temple
Dartsemdo County
(177) Grib srib Monastery
rNga ba County
(178) rTogs Idan Monastery
(179) gDong li Monastery
(180) Nang zhig Monastery
(181) Coglo Monastery
'Bar kham County
(182) 'Bo la Monastery
(183) Kun 'brog Monastery
(184) Kaca Monastery
(185) Kaco Monastery
(186) dGon gsar Monastery
Chu chen County
(187) g Yung drung Iha steng Monastery
(188) mTsho mtho Monastery



List of the monasteries surveyed
(189) dGra lha khyung Monastery
(190) Bla med Monastery
(191) bZod sgom Monastery
rMe ba County
(192) Mag gsar Temple
(193) Tsha lung Monastery
mDzod dge County
(194) A skyid syang tshang Monastery
(195) Nyos zhing Monastery
(196) Gur skyang Monastery
(197) gYung drung bsam 'grub Monastery
(198) mDa' chen Monastery
Zung chu County
(199) Na steng Monastery
(200) Rin spungs Monastery
(201) sNang zhig dngul sku Monastery
(202) sKyang tshang Monastery
(203) mKhar yag Monastery
(204) Gla ro Monastery
(205) gSer gling Monastery
(206) Sa "brug Monastery
(207) Brag g-yung drung Hermitage
(208) dGa' mal Monastery
(209) New dGamal Monastery
(210) Shar khog gTso tshang Monastery
gZi tsha sde dgu County
(211) Tsub ma Monastery
(212) Dar rgyas Monastery
(213) Sa dbus Monastery
(214) IDong dpal Monastery
(215) Rab den Monastery
Wen Chuan County
(216) Bla ma Temple
(217) mChog gsum Temple
Yan yuan County
(218) La tha Temple



NEPAL
Mustang District
(219) Klu brag Monastery
.
Dolpo District
(220) gYung drung shug tshal gling Monastery
(221) Dar rgyas phun tshogs gling Monastery
(222) Yang dgon Monastery
(223) bSam gling Monastery
(224) mTha' srung Monastery
(225) sPung mo and sPu mer Temples
(226) gYung drung 'gro 'dul gling Monastery
(227) Srid rgyal Monastery
(228) Dorpatan Monastery
(229) Mon ri zur gsum Temple
(230) Khri brtan nor bu rtse Monastery
INDIA
(231) Manri Monastery in Dolanji
(232) Gling tshang Monastery
(233) Zhu g Yung drung kun grags gling Monastery



Bonpo monasteries and temples
in Central Tibet



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Central Tibet
(1) sMan ri Monastery
1. Name
bKra shis Man ri
2. Location
sMan ri Monastery is located in Thob rgyal xiang in rNam gling rdzong,
Shigatse. From the sTag gru kha ferry, it is a full day's ride on horseback. On
the way there are two farming villages, mDzob bzang and Glang phu. Two high
mountain passes called Gong nyag la and dByar enga la must be crossed before
reaching the monastery. Another route, passable by car, starting at Shigatse, goes
through rNam gling rdzong up to Thob rgyal xiang. From there to the monastery,
halfway up the mountain, is a half-day ride on horseback.
3. History
The monastery was founded in 1405 by mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan
(1356-1415), formerly a monk in gYas rudBen sa kha. His successor, Gyal tshab
Rin chen rgyal mtshan, enlarged it with several monks' living quarters. After having
been gradually expanded over four centuries, the monastery became an important
centre for the propagation of Bonpo doctrines. Apart from having two assembly
halls, it had many buildings and there were about three hundred monks divided
among four monastic colleges: Gling stod, Gling smad, Gling skad and Gling zur
and six hostels (khang tshan): A sta, Rong mi, La dbyil, rGyal rong, Grub thob
and Drel pa. The monk students came from various regions of Tibet. Among the
Bonpo, the monastery was considered the source of all their monastic and liturgical
traditions
From the founder of the monastery, mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan, to the
abbot Shes rab blo gros, there were thirty-two abbots. The last abbot, Shes rab blo
gros, fled to India in 1959 and later died there. The monastery itself was completely
destroyed during the Cultural Revolution and remained unrestored for about twenty
years. Rebuilding of the monastery did not begin until 1984, and it is still under
reconstruction
In 1969, the new sMan ri Monastery was founded at Dolanji, Himachal
Pradesh, India. With this establishment, the monastic tradition of sMan ri has been
revived through the efforts of its abbot, Lung rtogs bstan pa'i nyi ma (b.1929), who
is now counted as the thirty-third abbot of sMan ri.
The monastery had a system of abbotship. Abbots were appointed by a lottery
from among those well versed in religious philosophy and holding the dge bshes
degree. The line of abbots is as follows:
1. Shes rab rgyal mtshan (1356-1415)



a
SI
2. Rin chen rgyal mtshan
3. Nam mkha' ye shes
4. Kun bzang rgyal mtshan
5. bsTan 'dzin rin chen rgyal mtshan
6. Tshul khrims rgyal mtshan
7. Sod nams ye shes
8. bSod nams g-yung drung
9. She tsu drung mutt
10. Shes rab 'od zer
11. gYung drung rgyal mtshan
12. Shes rab blo gros
13. Shes rab 'od zer (2nd)
14. gTsug phud 'od zer
15. gYung drung tshul khrims
16. Rin chen od zer
17. Rin chen Ihun grub
18. Shes rab bstan'dzin
19. Shes rab dbang rgyal
20. gYung drung dbang rgyal
21. Phun tshogs nam rgyal
22. Sod nams blo gros
23. Nyi ma bstan 'dzin
24.bSod nams phun tshogs
25. Shes rab g-yung drunge
26. Sangs rgyas bstan'dzin
27. bsTan 'dzin Tshul khrims
28. Phun tshogs blo gros
29. Gyal ba blo gros
30. bs Tan pa blo gros
31. Nyi ma dbang rgyal
32. Shes rab blo gross S
33. Lung rtogs bstan pa'i nyi ma
d
de
rste
Mein
4. Hierarchical system
- mkhan po
- slob dpon
- dbu mdzad
- dge bskos
- bla brang gnyer pa
- grwa tshang spyi gnyer
30



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Central Tibet
- spyi gnyertes
- spyi khyab
A
- las parte
- dkon gnyer
-khang tshan dge rgan
un
5. Current number of monks
Sixty novices and monks
6. Current education
Students receive two lessons daily, each lasting one to two hours. In summer
and autumn, the monks usually go back to their homes.
7. Educational exchange
Bonpo monasteries in Hor and Kong po regions send their young monk
students to be trained in sMan ri, where they receive education in traditional
learning, such as poetry, and training in elementary and advanced studies in Bonpo
metaphysics. Upon graduation, they return to their monasteries.
8. Daily rituals
Besides their daily studies, the monks perform regular and frequent religious
services dedicated to the tutelary (yi dam) and protective (bka'skyong) deities.
9. Annual rituals performed in former times, based on the Tibetan calendar
- 1st month: on the 4th and Sth days, commemoration of the anniversary of
the birth of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan; from the 6th to the 15th, the
examination of the candidates for the dge bshes degree; on the 8th, the bya
mjal ceremony; on the 10th, a performance of the ritual cycle of Tshe dbang
rig 'dzin; on the 14th and 15th, the memorial service of the birth of sTon pa
gShen rab.
- 2nd month: from the 19th day of the 2nd month to the 9th day of the 4th
month, twenty-one monk students went into retreat at dByar skya hermitage to
devote themselves exclusively to debate
- 4th month: from the 10th day, all the hostels held assemblies of their own for
prayers.
- 5th month: a performance of the dgu gtor rite, which ended with the gtor
rgyag ceremony and the 'cham dance.
- 6th month: on the 10th day, performance of the ritual cycle of Tshe dbang
rig 'dzin at 'Khrungs gzhis, the house of the Bru family situated below the
monastery.



- 7th month: from the 25th to the 29th, a performance of the ritual known as
sPyi rim chen mo, based on the ritual cycles of Khro bo and Phur pa; the
ceremony ended with the following 'cham dances: gShen rab dgu 'cham,
gYung drung dgu'cham, Nam brgyad, sTag 'cham and Seng 'cham, and the
gtor rgyag ceremony called Me ri tse.
- 8th month: the celebration of the New Year, for thirteen days, during which all
the monks were customarily served tea and barley flour.
- 9th month: a performance of the ritual devoted to Mra ba'i seng ge, deity of
wisdom, for a week, ending with the empowerment ceremony.
- 10th month: offerings of the sacrificial cake a thousand times to sTag la me
"bar.
About the 12th month some monks from the monastery were sent to perform
various rituals at the palace of the sacred Bonpo family known as Bru, situated
below the monastery. From the 17th century the palace was called 'Khrungs gzhis,
the 'Birth place', since the Second Panchen Lama, Blo bzang ye shes (1663-1737),
and the Fifth Panchen Lama, bsTan pa'i dbang phyug (1854-1882), were both born
to the Bru family.
The monastery provides tea and gruel at noon for monk students. As for the
regular monks in the monastery, their families are responsible for their living
expenses or in some cases the monks make a living reciting prayers and conducting
religious ceremonies outside the monastery. In summer and autumn almost all the
monks return to their homes.
10. Books held in the monastery
There is a set of the bka''gyur published by Ayung Lama and skal bzang phun
tshogs in Chengdu, 1985-87, and a printed copy of The Collected Works of mNyam
med Shes rab rgyal mtshan printed in Chamdo.
11. Income and expenses
Money and articles donated by patrons are used mainly for the restoration of
the monastery and meals for the monk students.
12. Local community
There are two villages, Gang kha and Ding phu, at the foot of Mount Man ri;
the villagers, who are farmers, are all followers of Bon.
13. Local festivals
On the 3rd day of the 1st month and 14th of the 5th month of the Tibetan
calendar all the villagers take part in the ceremony of propitiation of the local deity
of Mount dBal ri behind sDing phu village.



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Central Tibet
14. Occupation of the local people
Agriculture
(2) gYung drung gling
1. Name
Ra lag (or Ru lag) g Yung drung gling
2. Location
Starting from the sTag gru kha ferry on the Lhasa-Shigatse highway, one
arrives at g Yung drung gling Monastery after crossing a small bridge on the 'O
yul Ra chu river. When the river rises in summer, this small bridge is impassable;
instead, one must take a roundabout way, crossing another bridge, which takes an
hour to get to the monastery.
3. History
The monastery was founded by sNang ston Zla ba rgyal mtshan (b.1796) in
1834 on the bank of the Yarlung Tsangpo river, at the foot of Mount 'Olha Gyal
bzang. Later, the second abbot, skal bzang nyi ma (b.1841), extended it. Nyi ma
bstan'dzin (b.1813), the 23rd abbot of sMan ri Monastery, came to help set up
philosophical studies and became the chief teacher there. Later, the Sth abbot of
the monastery, mKhan chen Shes rab blo Idan, further extended the monastery by
building the temple mThong grol lha khang, and Shes rab gragspa, who was a chief
teacher, had the large assembly hall ('du khang) built. There was a residence for the
abbot (bla brang) and seven hostels (khang tshan) for the monk students, as well as
individual houses for the chief teacher and the monks who completed their studies.
Formerly, the monastery possessed a great number of gilt-bronze and
copper statues, including those of Nam par rgyal ba. In the temples there were
reliquary gilt-copper stupas containing the remains of abbots. The monastery was
an important seat of learning for Bonpo monks coming from Amdo, Gyal rong,
Khyung po, Hor, Khams and nomad regions in Byang thang. It was particularly
renowned for its extensive library and had its own woodblocks for printing religious
texts. There were normally about two hundred monks resident in the monastery.
The 9th abbot, Shes rab bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan (1911-1979), had a large gilded
rooftop erected on the main hall; he also had a gilt-copper statue of Nam par rgyal
ba made, two storeys high. In 1959 he fled to India, and the monastery itself was
razed to the ground in 1965 during the Cultural Revolution. In 1982 Shes rab bstan
'dzin and Kun gsal blo gros, who were monks in the monastery before its
destruction, were put in charge of its reconstruction. They managed to have the



assembly hall and two temples rebuilt.
The monastery had a system of abbotship. Abbots were appointed by a lottery
from among those well versed in religious philosophy and having the dge bshes
degree. The line of abbots of the monastery is as follows:
1. Nang ston Zla ba rgyal mtshan
2. skal bzang nyi ma
3. Phun shogs dbang rgyal
4. Tshul khrims dbang rgyal
5. Shes rab blo Idan
6. Shes rab bstan pa'i nyi ma
7. Blo gros rgyal mtshan
8. Blogros nyi ma
9. Shes rab bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan
4. Hierarchical system
- mkhan po
- slob dpon
- dbu mdzad
-dge bskos
- bla brang gnyer pa
- sgrub khang a mchod
- mchod dpon
- las pa
- dkon gnyer
- khang tshan dge rgan
- ja g-yog
5. Current number of monks
Presently the monastery has no abbot, but there are about forty monk students.
6. Current education
Monks are required to study both elementary and religious philosophy, mainly
in winter and spring. Since its reconstruction after the Cultural Revolution, the
monastery has kept seven dge bshes.
7. Educational exchange
At present, other Bonpo monasteries, mainly in dBus and gTsang regions,
send their monks to study in g Yung drung gling, and they are to return to their own
monasteries after completing their studies. In addition, various monasteries, such as
sKyid mkhar Ri zhing (No.4) and Pus mo sgang (No.8) in Gro mo, invite tutors from
34



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Central Tibet
g Yung drung gling to their monasteries for a few months at a time.
8. Daily rituals
These consist of offering daily prayers and the propitiation of the monastery's
protective deities.
9. Annual rituals, based on the Tibetan calendar
- 1st month: on the 5th day, the memorial service of mNyam med Shes rab
rgyal mtshan; then, up to the 15th day, a debate on metaphysics ending with
the examination for the dge bshes degree.
- 4th month: a congregation for prayers and debate for fifteen days.
- 5th month: on the 15th, a performance of the 'Dzam gling spyi bsang ritual,
based on the brNgan bsang chen mo by sTong rgyung mthu chen.
- 8th month: a festival celebrating the founding of the monastery.
- 11th month: on the 7th, the memorial service for the death of the founder of
the monastery
- 12th month: from the 25th to the 30th, a performance of the dgu gtor rite,
ending with the performance of religious dances. In addition, the bskang gso
ritual is regularly performed for the guardians of the monastery.
During the summer the monks go to recite scriptures at private homes of
farmers and herdsmen in areas such as Nagchukha, Hor, and Khyung po. The rest
of the time the monks stay in the monastery, and their families provide their daily
necessities.
10. Books held in the monastery
These include five sets of the bKa''gyur published by Ayung Lama and skal
bzang phun tshogs in Chengdu, 1985-87, and two sets of The Collected Works of
mNyam med Sherab rgyal mtshan and more than ten separate volumes of scriptures.
11. Income and expenses
The money the monks earn by conducting religious ceremonies and reciting
prayers is used mainly for the renovation of the monastery. No detailed account is
set up for this.
12. Local community
There are fifty households in Ru lag village, where followers of Bon and
rNying ma pa live together. The villagers are farmers who engage mainly in grain
production and also keep a small number of livestock.



13. Local festivals
Only the men and boys of each household participate in the propitiation
ceremony dedicated to the sacred mountain, 'Olha Gyal bzang, on the 3rd day of
the 1st month and the 15th of the 5th month.
(3) Ri rgyal Monastery
1. Name
Dar sding (also Iding) Ri rgyal dgon; its formal name is Khri brtan nor bu rtse.
2. Location
A six-hour drive from Shigatse brings one to the seat of bZhad mthong smon
rdzong. From here it takes two hours to reach the monastery on foot. One can also
go there by bus.
3. History
Initially, there was only a small temple of the gShen family. In 1360 dMu
gshen Nyi ma rgyal mtshan, the fifteenth successor in the gShen lineage, not only
expanded the temple but also built the assembly hall and renamed Ri rgyal Khri
brtan nor bu rtse. It is situated on Mount Ri rgyal behind the village called Dar
sding. The seat of the gShen family is in Dar sding village, where the temple known
as gSer sgo khra mo was built in 1173 by Kun mkhyen Ye shes blo gros, who was
the ninth successor after gShen chen Klu dga' (996-1035). In the village there
was the famous stupa called sku 'bum rig byed khang. From the beginning of the
15th century, the monastery became renown for its statues, scriptures and stupas
of the Bon religion. In 1966, during the Cultural Revolution, the monastery on the
mountain, the temple gSer sgo khra mo and the great stupa were all completely
destroyed. In 1982 the monks began to rebuild the monastery. Led by Nor bu dbang
rgyal, they first restored gSer sgo khra mo in the village, then rebuilt Khri brtan nor
bu rise. It is said that there have been twenty-five abbots from Kun mkhyen Ye shes
blo gros to the present Nor bu dbang rgyal.
4. Headship system
Leadership was ensured by a system of abbotship, with the abbots coming
mostly from the gShen family.
5. Current number of monks
Twenty monks



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Central Tibet
6. Current education
As the monastery has not organized any study classes for the monks, they have
to look for private tutors for their studies.
7. Educational exchange
So far, this work has not yet begun.
8. Daily rituals
Religious services dedicated to the tutelary and protective deities are performed
everyday.
9. Annual rituals, based on the Tibetan calendar
- 1st month: on the 3rd day, a ceremony of offerings to the deities.
- 4th month: on the 10th, offerings according to the Margyud cycle.
- 5th month: on the 10th, offerings according to the Margyud cycle.
- 6th month: on the 4th, a general ceremony of offerings to the tutelary deities.
- 7th month on the Ist, a general ceremony of offerings to the tutelary deities.
- 10th month: on the 10th, offerings according to the Ma rgyud cycle.
- 11th month: on the 20th, a religious assembly for the practice of the Margyud
ritual cycle.
- 12th month: on the 15th, the anniversary of the birth of sTon pa yShen rab Mi
bo.
Now and then, monks go to recite prayers and scriptures for Bon followers
in the nomad areas of Byang thang. They usually stay in the monastery or in their
homes, but they must be present for the offerings during the religious assemblies and
the religious services observed at certain times prescribed by the monastery.
10. Books held in the monastery
These include three sets of the bka' 'gyur published by Ayung Lama and skal
bzang phun tshogs in Chengdu, 1985-87.
11. Income and expenses
Each year the monastery organizes the monks to conduct religious ceremonies
and recite prayers at the homes of the herdsmen in the nomad area of Byang thang,
The money earned is used for the restoration of the monastery and for the expenses
of offerings during the religious assemblies and services observed at certain
prescribed times during the following year.
12. Local community
To the south of the monastery there is a village called Ne nang with about one



hundred households, and to the north a village named skyid gzhong with about forty
households. The villagers in both are followers of Bon and are farmers.
13. Local festivals
Each household in the village normally participates in all the following
ceremonies: a ceremony of offerings to the local deities on the 3rd day of the 1st
month of the Tibetan calendar, an important activity during the Tibetan New Year,
the Bumping Harvest Festival (called 'Ong skor) on the 4th of the 6th month; a
general ceremony of offerings to the local deities on the 1st of the 7th month.
(4) Ri zhing Monastery
1. Name
sKyid mkhar Ri zhing fgon
2. Location
One can either drive from Pa nam rdzong, about thirty kilometres, or ride on
horseback directly from Gyantse by climbing over Yang ga pass. In the past, when
there was no road going straight there, one would go on horseback from Gyantse. Ri
zhing Monastery presently belongs to the skyid mkhar xiang administration.
3. History
Ri zhing Monastery was founded by Zhu yas Legs po in the eleventh century,
Zhu skye se chen po and Zhu Grol ba gshen rgyal initiated the way of expounding
scriptures and practising Bonpo teachings, and because of this the monastery
became very famous. At the time of the Fifth Dalai Lama (1617-1682), Zhu bs Tan
dzin nyi rgyal was recognized as one of the high-ranking lamas in Tibet. It is said
that Zhu bsTan 'dzin nyi rgyal once had an audience with the Manchu emperor and
the Manchu court gave him a large number of gifts.
The monastery owned thirteen estates, which were donated by the Tibetan
government. It is said that there were once, in its heyday, East, West and Middle
hostels (khang Ishan) with three hundred monks in the monastery. Before 1959 there
were sixty monks. It was totally destroyed during the Cultural Revolution, and now
only its ruins remain About 1984 Tshe ring rdo rje, a descendant of the Zhu family,
organized a few households to restore the hermitage called g Yu 'brang phyug mo.
Later, a small temple was gradually built, but the site of the monastery has been
moved to another place.



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Central Tibet
4. Headship system
In the past, the heads of the monastery were men of the Zhu family.
5. Current number of monks
Ten
6. Current education
After joining the monastery, monks go for elementary studies and the study
of Bon doctrines in gYung drung gling (No.2) for a few years. Upon completion of
their studies, they return to the monastery to take part in normal religious services.
7. Educational exchange
With the exception of sending some monks for studies in g Yung drung gling,
there are no exchanges with other monasteries.
8. Daily rituals
These consist of daily prayers to the tutelary deities and religious services
dedicated to protective deities of the monastery.
9. Annual rituals, based on the Tibetan calendar
- 1st month: on the 3rd day, the ceremony of offerings to the local deities
on Mount sPo bo rtse dmar and also on Mount Zhu bo, which is situated
behind the monastery, the celebration is joined in by all members of the local
community,
- 6th month: on the 15th day, the celebration of the festival known as skyid po
bla ma'i dus chen, 'Festival of the joyous Lamas'; the celebration, which is
held at the monastery, is attended by both the clergy and laymen.
The monks return to their homes whenever there are no religious assemblies in
the monastery. Although supplemented by the money they earn by going to recite
prayers and scriptures for laymen, they depend mainly on their families for their
daily necessities.
10. Books held in the monastery
These include a set of the bka' 'gyur published by Ayung Lama and skal bzang
phun tshogs in Chengdu, 1985-87, and seven cases of the Chamdo edition of the
Collected Works of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery itself has no income at all, so each household in the village
contributes to the provision of all the expenses for the ceremony of offerings.



12. Local community
There are, altogether, five villages with two hundred households, where
followers of Bon and Buddhism (dGe lugs pa) live together.
13. Local festivals
See Annual rituals above
14. Occupation of the local people
Although the area is regarded as semi-agricultural and semi-nomad, the
villagers are mainly engaged in agricultural work.
(5) De chen sgang Hermitage
1. Name of the hermitage
dPal ri khud yang dben bde chen sgang
2. Location
After driving 480 kilometres from Shigatse, one reaches Mount Mu la, whence
a further drive of thirty kilometres takes one to La phu village. The hermitage is
located near the village. Travellers on foot usually stay one night in Tingri, then
reach the hermitage early the next day.
3. History
bDe chen sgang was originally a hermitage established by the recluse sPa ston
dPal mchog (b.1040) of the sacred Bonpo family known as spa, whose seat was
found in La phug village. Later, the hermitage was extended into a monastery by
sPadPal Idan bzang po and then became an important centre of learning for Bonpo
followers in Western Tibet. The monastery produced several monk-scholars: for
example, Tre ston Gyal mtshan dpal who had compiled a type of encyclopedia, in
the monastery, of Bon and Buddhist doctrines, entitled Bon sgo gsal byed and the
well-known historian, sPa bsTan rgyal bzang po, who wrote several works in the
same place in the 15th century. Later, a branch of the spa family migrated to Ye tha,
in the Hor region, northern Tibet, where it became prosperous, and as a result the
monastery at La phug declined and became once again a hermitage. It is still a small
hermitage where a few married religious practitioners (ser khyim) reside.
4. Headship of the hermitage
The hermitage has no one leading it.



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Central Tibet
5. Current number of residents
One monk and four ser khyim
6. Current education
The only monk has gone to study in g Yung drung gling Monastery (No.2). He
is expected to return and teach other people.
8. Daily rituals
These consist of performing frequent religious services dedicated to the tutelary
and protective deities in the sgrub khang sanctuary.
9. Annual rituals
The hermitage cannot afford to hold any religious assemblies and is not
expected to do so.
Apart from going out to recite scriptures and prayers, the ser khyim live with
their families most of the time.
10. Books held in the hermitage
There is a set of the bka''gyur published by Ayung Lama and skal bzang phun
tshogs in Chengdu, 1985-87.
11. Income and expenses
The meagre income of the hermitage is used for its renovation.
12. Local community
The local village is called La phug, where followers of Bon and Buddhism live
together.
13. Local festivals
The villagers propitiate local deities and erect propitiatory flags on the
mountain behind the hermitage on the 3rd day of the Ist month and the 14th of the
5th month.
14. Occupation of the local people
A semi-agricultural and semi-nomad settlement
41



(6) Zang ri Monastery
1. Name
bZang ri dgon (often wrongly spelled Zangs ri); its formal name is Hun grub
mthong smon gling.
2. Location
The monastery is situated on Mount bZang po ri, behind Zangri village. It is
accessible by car. After reaching Nye mo bridge on the way from Lhasa to Shigatse,
and driving northward for eight kilometres, one arrives at the county seat of Nye mo.
From here a drive of three kilometres takes one to bZang ri village.
3. History
bZang ri Monastery was founded in 1096 by mkhas pa Tshul khrims dpal
chen. It became a great centre for studies in metaphysics, where, over the years,
hundreds of monks studied. It was also a place where tantric meditation and rituals
were commonly practised. However, the monastery soon began to decline, and
did so for several generations. Later it was looked after by sPa ston 'Od gsal rgyal
mtshan, a descendant of the sPa family. This master's main seat was at Man gong in
Shangs. His chief disciple was Zhang ston Ba thang pa. There then followed several
masters, such as Zhang ston Tshul khrims blo Idan, Sum ston Ha 'bum, Sum ston
Dul ba bzang po, Sum ston bZang po dpal, mKhas grub Gyal mtshan mchog legs
of rMe'u and Rong ston Shes rab 'od zer, all of whom were active in the monastery.
The monastery was mainly maintained by the members of the rMe'u family. There
have been, altogether to date, forty descendants of the rMe'u family down to the
present Me'u Nyi zla dbang grags. The monastery was originally located east of
bZang ri village and was destroyed during the Cultural Revolution. In 1982, its site
was moved up to the top of the hill behind the village and was then rebuilt.
4. Headship system
The monastery had successive abbots, who mainly came from the rMe'u
family.
5. Current number of monks
Fifteen.
6. Current education
This consists mainly of two aspects: 1) sending monks to g Yung drung
gling Monastery (No.2) for elementary studies in philosophy; 2) teaching Bonpo
knowledge and conducting various rituals under the guidance of the old monks



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Central Tibet
within the monastery,
7. Educational exchange
See No.6 above.
8. Daily rituals
These comprise mainly the reciting of prayers to invoke the tutelary (vi dam)
and protective (bka'skyong) deities.
9. Annual rituals, based on the Tibetan calendar
- 6th month: on the 4th day, a ceremony of colouring the Bonpo images.
- 12th month: on the 29th, offerings to the local deities.
10. Books held in the monastery
There is a copy of the bka 'gyur published by Ayung Lama and skal bzang
phun tshogs in Chengdu, 1985-87.
11. Income and expenses
Normally it costs the monastery a large sum, in money and materials, for the
provision of meals at religious assemblies and for the renovation of the monastery.
So far no clear account is kept at hand. While the monastery provides the monks
with one meal every day, the monks have to bear the rest of their living expenses
themselves. From what he earns reciting prayers at private homes, a monk is
required to tum in one yuan per day to the monastery; he is allowed to keep the rest.
12. Local community
There are 114 households in bZan ri village, all follow the Bon religion.
13. Local festivals
A ceremony of offerings by the whole village to the local deities on Mount
bZang ri is performed on the 4th day of the 6th month and the 29th of the 12th
month
14. Occupation of the local people
The villagers mostly make their living as farmers, and are engaged in grain
production.



(7) mKhar sna Monastery
1. Name
mKhar sna bsam gtan gling
2. Location
mKhar sna Monastery was situated at the foot of Mount Man ri. Since there is
no road leading to the place it can only be reached on horseback or on foot.
3. History
Originally it was a hermitage in the hills where monks of g Yas ru dBen sa kha
Monastery practised meditation. Shes rab g-yung drung (b.1838), the 25th Abbot of
sMan ri Monastery(No. 1) expanded it into a monastery. It was completely destroyed
during the Cultural Revolution. To date, the monastery has not been formally
restored.
(8) Pus mo sgang Monastery
1. Name
The full name is gSang sngags theg chen g-yung drung gling.
2. Location
After a nine-hour drive from Shigatse, one reaches Ya tung in Gro mo, whence
a three-hour journey on foot takes one to Pus mo sgang. One can also drive there.
3. History
Pus mo sgang Monastery was founded by g Yung drung dbang rgyal, who
was a hermit living on Mount Kyid mu sman ri in Gro mo. The monastery was
then maintained by a series of fourteen masters up to bsTan pa rgya mtsho. He fled
to Bhutan in 1959. The monastery was completely destroyed during the Cultural
Revolution. In 1985 its restoration began. Before 1959, there were sixty monks.
g Yung drung the ring and his son Tshe ring dbang 'dus are in charge of the
monastery
4. Headship system
The monastery had a system of abbotship.
5. Current number of monks
Six



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Central Tibet
6. Current education
Two monks have been sent to study in g Yung drung gling Monastery (No.2).
Since there are no formal study classes in the monastery, the rest of the young
monks learn prayers and scriptures under the guidance of the old monks.
7. Educational exchange
With the exception of sending one or two monk students to study under the
master Kungsal blo gros in gYung drung gling, there are no exchanges with other
monasteries.
8. Daily rituals
These consist of the frequent performance of religious services dedicated to the
tutelary and protective deities, and the recitation of prayers and scriptures,
9. Annual rituals, based on the Tibetan calendar
- 1st month: on the 5th day, the memorial service of mNyam med Shes rab
rgyal mtshan based on the gYung drung klong rgpas.
- 2nd month: on the 10th, a performance of the tshes bcu ceremony in which
prayers are said to Dran pa nam mkha' and his twin sons Tshe dbang rig 'dzin
and Padma mthong grol.
- 3rd month: from the 13th to the 16th, a religious assembly
- 5th month: on the 13th and 16th, performances of religious services dedicated
to the tutelary and protective deities, in which the common people near the
monastery participate.
- 11th month: from the 7th to the 16th, a ceremony of offerings to the tutelary
deity, during which time religious dances take place the whole day, as well
as the propitiation of the local deity Brag btsan rgod 'bar ba on the mountain
behind the monastery
In summer and autumn the monks return to their homes to live with their
families; in winter and spring they go back to the monastery for religious activities
and studies.
10. Books held in the monastery
There are sixteen cases of the Khro skyab edition of the Khams chen, a set of
the Ngan song sbyong ba'i gzungs written in gold and twelve cases of scriptures
given by gYung drung gling Monastery.
11. Income and expenses
Since the monastery has a meagre income, the relevant expenses are mainly
borne by patrons.



12. Local community
There is one village with thirty-five households, all of whom are Bon followers.
13. Local festivals
On the 3rd day of the 1st month, the 15th of the 4th month and the 16th of
the 11th month, all the villagers take part in the ceremonies of offerings to the
local deities on Mount sPo bo tshe dmar and Mount Zhu bo ri at the back of the
monastery.
14. Occupation of the local people
The villagers are mainly engaged in farming, with lumbering as a side
occupation.



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Central Tibet
Shan-rtsa County
dPa'-mgon County
Rin-'duse
Nam Wing County
Phu-thang,
ở Hà bị - phu
Gyu-mtsho
bZhed-mthong-smon
County
Ri-than
rNam-gling
Sog.chen
sNye-mo
YesTag-else
County
Sbangs chu
Nah-maj
Gang pa
Thar hob-rgyal
Yas-rudbes sa
po trung volumele
Rin-spungs
County
gZhis-ka-rtse
County Sear
Township Seat
Administrative Village
Monastery
County Border
River
Road
--
Footpath
1/790,000



Shan-rtsa County
Nyang-ra
bZhad mthong smon Cou
Tag-mo-shar
rNam-gling
County
Phru-sgrig
5
I-thaft;
Isha-phug
Ta-nag-phus
Na-mo-che
©
@
o
County Seat
Township Seat
Administrative Village
Monastery
County Border
Rin-chen-rtse
- Hi-rfalº
Dar-sding
Thong Son
gZhis-ka-rtse
Chab-kha
---
Ta-nag-mida
lHa-rtse County
River
Road
Sa-skya County
Footpath
1/1,370,000



gZhis-ka-rtse
NATOL.
..
Sikhar-stad
mKhar-stod
Rin-spungs County
2 stag-rtse
Pa-snam County
Brong-rtse
Myang chy
gTsang kha
river
17
Ri-nang.
Palihor choses....
TIS
rI'se-chen
Bl-zhing
RI thing
Gyang-rtse
Gángs-mtsho
dKyil-mkhar
Ra-lung
SNa-dkar-rtse
County
Bonpo monasteries and temples in Central Tibet
Khang-dmar County
County Sent
Township Seat
Administrative Village
Monastery
County Border
River
@
49
Road
1/630,000
----
Footpath



Sa-dga' County
Brag-sa:
Kre-pas-
De-cher-sgang
sKyid grọng County
Dzong-dga
Gung-thang
gNya'-lam County
Bal-yul
2
skyld-rong groute-brdal
County Seat
Township Seat
Administrative Village
Monastery
County Border
Gra
-
-
River
1/910,000
Road
Footpath



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Central Tibet
dPa'-mgon County
County Seat
•
Township Seat
Administrative Village
Monastery
County Border
River
......
Road
Footpath
1/600,000
rNam-gling
County
Mrk
movie
Dam-gzhung County
Horsde
A Brag-skor
sNye mo ma che river
river
gZhu-smad
Dar-grong
Wang-
Egzha chu
gbong mkhar
mKhar-ru
Thon-pa
Yar lung
isang po
river
Rin-spungs County



Pa-snam County
Khang-dmar County
Gam-pa County
'Bras-ljong
'Brug-yul
river
ma chu
bu
-
Gam
Z
kud-srung-sgang
Pes moulin
Shar-gsing-ma
...Gro-no-stad
County Seat
Township Seat
Adminstrative Village
Monastery
County Border
River
...... Road
- Footpath
1/630,000



2
OD
A FE
*
16
3
Das
ca
TE
ME
ER
DE
les
*
S
***
(1) sMan ri Monastery, Plate 1
(Photo of a drawing of the old monastery by A mchod . 1965, Per kvaeme)
1. Klu dga'
2. Gyal ba'i gzims khang
3. Srid rgyal tha btsugs
4. skor lam
5. sPom ra lha btsugs
6. sku gdung khang
7. QC khang
8. 'Khor lo ser po
9. Ja khang
10, Grab khang
11. mNyam med gser khri
12. Bla brang
13. dPe mdzod
14. Bang mdzod
15. Gyal bartse
16. Du khang
17. bka' 'gyur khang
18. A sta khang tshan
19. Rong mi không thay
20. La dbyil khang tshan
21. Gyal rong khang tshan
22. Grub thob khang tshan
23. Thun rwa
24. Drel pa khang tshan
25, Tshan nyid khang
26. Phari'du khang
27. mNyarn med bzhugs khri
28. Chu mgo phug
Bonpo monasteries and temples in Central Tibet
53



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Central Tibet
(1) sMan ri Monastery, Plate 2 sMan ri, ruins and new buildings
(Photo Dondrup Lhagyal 1996)
(1) sMan ri Monastery, Plate 3 The Khrungs gzhi, residence of the Bru family
(Photo Dondrup Lhagyal 1996)



E
B
asa
RO
UDY
MAC
(2) Ra lag gYung drung gling Monastery, Plate 1
(Photo of a drawing of the old monastery by A mchod c. 1965, Per Kvaeme)
1. 'Olha Gyal bzang
2. sPom ra la blsas
3 Grub khang
4. Bla brang
5. Trong grol la khang
6, sKu gdung khang
7. Khyung nag pho brang
8. Drel pa khang tshan
9. sKyid skyid sa kha
10. Du khang chanh
11. A mdo khang tshan
12. La dbyil khang tshan
13. Gyal rong khang tshan
14. sko spo khang tshan
15. Grub thob khang tshan
16. Kho b khang
Bonpo monasteries and temples in Central Tibet



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Central Tibet
(2) Ra lag gYung drung gling Monastery, Plate 2 The monastery, reconstructed
(Photo Samten G. Karmay 1996)



(3) Ri rgyal Monastery, Plate 1 The monastery on the top of the hill and Dar sding village in the foreground
(Photo Dondrup Lhagyal 1996)
(3) Ri rgyal Monastery, Plate 2 Dar sding village with the temple gShen gyi gser sgo khra mo in the centre
(Photo Dondrup Lhagyal 1996)



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Central Tibet
(3) Ri rgyal Monastery, Plate 3 Chi med, a monk of the monastery
(Photo Dondrup Lhagyal 1996)
(4) Ri zhing Monastery, Plate 1 Ruins of the old Ri zhing Monastery
(Photo Dondrup Lhagyal 1996)



(4) Ri zhing Monastery, Plate 2 New Ri zhing Monastery
(Photo Dondrup Lhagyal 1996)
(4) Ri zhing Monastery, Plate 3 Cave gYu 'brang phyug mo
(Photo Dondrup Lhagyal 1996)



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Central Tibet
(6)
Zang ri Monastery, Plate 1 The monastery on the top of the hill and bZangri village in the foreground
(Photo Dondrup Lhagyal 1996)
(6)
Zang ri Monastery. Plate 2 bZangri village
(Photo Dondrup Lhagyal 1996)



(6) Zang ri Monastery. Plate 3 Residence of the rMe'u tshang family
(Photo Dondrup Lhagyal 1996)



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Central Tibet
(8) Pus mo sgang Monastery, Plate 1 Assembly hall of the monastery
(Photo Dondrup Lhagyal 1996)



(8) Pus mo sgang Monastery, Plate 2 gYung trung the ring, a monk of the monastery
(Photo Dondrup Lhagyal 1996)
(8) Pus mo sgang Monastery Plate 3 Gro stod village in Gro mo
(Photo Dondrup Lhagyal 1996)



Bonpo monasteries and temples
in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
The Nag chu region
One hundred and sixty kilometres west of Lhasa, along the Qinghai Tibet
highway, lies a marvellous snow mountain called gNyan chen Thang Iha, one of the
Five Great Holy Mountains of Bon (bon gyi gnas mchog gangs ri chen po Inga). It is
about 7,117 metres in height. The abode of the deity gNyan chen Thang Iha (known
in Buddhist tradition as I Ha chen rDo rje 'bar ba rtsal), distinguished among the
nine mountain divinities, gNyan chen Thang Iha externally appears in the shape of
a simple snow mountain, while internally it holds a crystal treasury glittering with
various jewels. At the foot of the mountain is a lake topped with waves of nectar,
half way up is a pretty rainbow-coloured tent. The mountaintop is covered with
white clouds of mizzly jewels. The pastureland, blanketed with flowers, looks like
a mandala of various flowers offered to the deity, and the whole area, surrounded
by the crystal stupas; the snow mountains is a pilgrimage site of great superiority.
There is no definite iconographic description of gNyan chen Thang Iha, but the Ha
bskyed nang gsal describes it as follows: "gNyan chen Thang lha would be smiling,
allowing his canine teeth to be seen slightly, his three brilliant eyes emitting light,
his hair bound with fine white silk, being thoroughly dignified, holding a cane with a
five-edged vajra in his highly raised right hand, and a crystal rosary in his left hand,
clad in a tricoloured cloak of fine silk, his head crowned with blazing jewels, and
beautifully dressed up, all over, with varieties of precious stones."
gNam mtsho phyug mo, the goddess of the lake (also known as rDorrje kun
grags ma or Rang byung rgyal mo in Buddhist tradition), the consort of gNyan
chen Thang Iha, is one of the twelve brTan ma, the ruling goddesses of Tibet. These
twelve goddesses are Kun grags ma. Ya ma skyong, Kun bzang mo, bGegs kyi gtso,
sPyan gcig ma, dPal gyi yum, Drag mo rgyal, Klu mo dkar mo, Bod khams skyong,
sMan gcig ma, g Yar mo sil and gYu sgron (in Buddhist tradition the name of each
of these goddesses is preceded by the word rdo rje). Among these goddesses Kun
grags ma takes precedence. She is superb, having a turquoise-coloured body, one
face, two hands and three eyes of wisdom. Holding a banner of crowning victory
in her right hand and a mirror of sanctity in her left, she has a great loveliness. Her
indigo-blue hair hangs down to some length, and she is mounted on a turquoise-blue
dragon in the centre of a swirling white cloud. It is believed that Kun grags ma, the
consort of gNyan chen Thang lha, is the principal one among the twelve brTan ma,
the protective goddesses of Bon.
The mountain deities surrounding gNyan chen Thang lha, in all directions, are
Do rje 'bar ba rtsal in the east, rDo rje 'bar ba rtsal in the south, rDo rje 'bar ba
rtsal in the west, rDo rje 'bar ba rtsal in the north, IHa chen Kyes bu bzhin bzang
in the south-east, "Brong g-yag zhol dkar in the south-west, rDo rje 'bar ba rtsal in
the north-west and 1Ha mchog Tshangs pa chen po in the north-east. All these deities
are said to be engirded: by the 360 companion deities and trillion armed deities in



circumference, by the white conchs of miraculous transformation circling around in
the sky, and by a pack of white wolves of both sexes and a herd of long-haired wild
yaks, excited in anger, from above and all directions.
gNam mtsho phyug mo is a holy lake of Eternal Bon just like the other lakes,
including, Dwang ra g-yu mtsho, Ma pang g-yu mtsho and Ma ma mtsho. It is a very
large lake, extending about seventy kilometres from east to west, and about thirty
kilometres from north to south. More than half of its area belongs to dPal mgon
rdzong in Nag chu. As it is possible to travel by car from 'Dam gzhung via gNam
mtsho up to dPal mgon rdzong, the lake can be visited and thoroughly enjoyed.
In shape, gNam mtsho phyug mo resembles rDo rje phag mo, foremost among
goddesses, lying on her back: the rivers Ngang chu and Gri chu look just like her
right hand, holding a sword and lifted high into the sky; the three small ponds on
the upper side of the lake bear a resemblance to the three eyes of wisdom looking
upward; the lHa Icam khan pa looks like her bound hair; Ma chags Se mo do looks
like the left hand of the goddess holding a skull filled with blood in front of her
breast; the counterpart of Ma chags Se mo do is a cave, which represents her right
leg, bent; the lower end of the lake represents her left leg, stretched out; and Hal
po gdong lies just like the mattress of the fainted figure under the goddess' foot.
Because of these, a mere glance at the lake may be enough for devotes of Bon to
have a feeling of real experience with Yum chen rDo rje phag mo, In their hearts,
devoted reverence to the lake may arise, as well as sincerity of supreme virtue.
Similarly, the glorious "Khor lo bde mchog has as the seats of his body, speech
and mind the following: the snow mountain Ti se (Mount Kailash) as the seat of his
body, gNam mtsho phyug mo his speech and Tsa ri his mind, each of which has an
auspicious season for making pilgrimages. Ti se should be visited in Horse years,
gNam mtsho phyug mo in Sheep years and Tsari in Monkey years.
Nam mtsho phyug mo can be divided into three parts: bkra shis do do che
as the seat of his body of speech, Bya do Nam mkha' do as the seat of his speech
of speech, and Ma chags Se mo do as the seat of his mind of speech. These are
subdivided yet again into thirteen do chen and thirteen gdong chen. Furthermore,
gNam mtsho phyug mo has so many other characteristic sites, such as rGa lo gzim
phug, mGon po phug, sGrol ma phug, Orgyan phug, bka' thang phug, Zhabs drung
phug, Bar do'i phrang, Cong zhi phug pa, Karma phug, Klu khang phug and Nam
mkha' mdzod, that it looks like the sky strewn with clusters of stars.
Both gNyan chen Thang Tha and gNam mtsho phyug mo should be
circumambulated in Sheep years, the auspicious pilgrimage time. It can take from
fifteen to twenty days and nights on foot. A pilgrimage to gNam mtsho alone can
take at least seven to nine days. It is difficult to visit the island (do) called Se mo do
in summer because it is the centre of the lake and there is no boat, while bkra shis do
and Bya do may be very accessible. Currently a great many pious people both clergy



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
and laty frequently offer prayers in front of gNyan chen Thang Iha in various ways,
such as erecting cairns, burning incense, raising prayer flags or white ceremonial
scarves, casting their possessions into the lake, and so forth. The sacred gNyan chen
Thang Iha has now become a particularly celebrated site to which numerous clerical
and lay devotees of Bon pay a visit in search of protection or in order to offer
prayers, irrespective of their sect, school or party.
The town of Nag chu is 154 kilometres from 'Dam gzhung. Then from Nag chu,
a ten-kilometre drive northward on the highway and a further eighty-two kilometres
in a north-easterly direction lead one to sNye rong rdzong. Because of the rather bad
condition of the road between Nag chu and sNye rong rdzong, the trip can take some
two and a half hours.
Nye rong rdzong
Nye rong lies to the north of Nag chu, south of the famous Thang khug la
mountain range. It is about 14,560 square kilometres in area, and is 4,700 metres
above sea level. Pastureland covers an area of 11,800 mu sNye rong, with a
population of 25,000, has one qu under its immediate supervision and thirteen xiang,
in which there are 165 village committees
At one time, when sNye rong was under Sa skya pa rule, there were three major
tribes in the district, and another one was formed during the time of Phag mo grupa
rule. These four then joined with several other tribes of the area, including 'Bri ru,
sBra chen and sTeng chen, to be united into the so-called Thirty-nine Tribes (Tsho ba
so dgu), which is very famous in Tibetan history. In the middle of the Ming Dynasty
during the time of the Phag mo gru pa, the Thirty-nine Tribes was were absorbed into
the Mongolian Tumed and Khalkha tribes in m Tsho sngon. It came under Mongolian
control in 1637, and in 1732, the central government of the Qing Dynasty ceded it
back to the Tibetan government. But in 1751, the Qing official (am ban) in Tibet
looked after the Thirty-nine Tribes. In 1916, the Tibetan government established the
post of governor-general of Hor (Hor spyi khyab), and put part of the Thirty-nine
Tribes under its control. But in 1942, the Tibetan government abolished the post of
governor-general of Hor and divided the Thirty-nine Tribes into six divisions and
Nye rong rdzong is one of the six. On August 1st, 1960, the Nye rong rdzong
office was established.
(9) sNang gsal Monastery
A brag sNang gsal g-yung drung gsal ba'i gling is under the jurisdiction of
Dar 'dzum xiang (also known as mTsho dbyang qu), which lies more than twenty
kilometres to the north of sNye rong rdzong. Although it is not very far, it takes more
than an hour to get there by car because of the terribly muddy road, which makes the
going difficult. This monastery is set in a fairly good natural environment.



The monastery was founded in 1906. The predecessor of this monastery was
sMad sog gYung drung 'dzin pa'i gling (ruins of an ancient monastery near Nag
chu kha were recently identified as those of this monastery) which was founded by
Khyung po A bla grags pa and Sha ba sang grol. It was prosperous, with hundreds
of monks and nuns. In spite of the extensive work devoted to the three noble
deeds "keeping, defending and spreading the teachings of Eternal Bon" through
generations of lamas, the monastery was upset by, needless to say, the troops of the
Mongolian Jungar. During that time the Mongolians subjected the two Khyung po
lamas, dBu se and dBu nag, to imprisonment and eventually murdered these two
faultless lamas. The sight of this incident made their great many followers tremble
and the lives of their followers subsequently fell into hopelessness.
Then a monastery called Khri dkar was set up on the bank of the Yag chu river
and the teachings of Bon were spread by several generations of lamas. Destiny,
however, reduced the monastery to a deteriorated state. Khyung po bsTan rgyal grags
pa then laid the foundation for the next one at Khyung rdzong, situated at Gad ngas
la, and maintained it for a while, but it, too, collapsed in the Eleventh Rab byung.
Then Mi 'gyur grags pa, Gyal skyid grags pa, Nyi dbang, IHa dbang, Tshe
dbang g-yung drung and others, all from Khyung po, established the residence (bla
brang) of Khyung po sBra nag in A stod district, which burdened them with the
expectations of many proponents of Eternal Bon that their thirst for a monastery
would be satisfied.
In 1882, a miraculous baby, who emitted many auspicious signs, was born
to a couple, Khyung dkar gDung pa lha bu, the father, and Gur bza' dPal 'dzoms,
the mother. The baby was called Nam mkha'rgyal mtshan. From childhood he
stood out prominently among other children, with his varied talents. Endowed with
auspicious signs, he was praised by everyone. Until the age of twenty-five, he lived
as a herdsman in the manner of a yogi in order to avoid being possessed by unclean
transmigratory existence. At that time, his parents repeatedly murmured their hope
that their son would succeed to the leadership of the family, but he did not accept
this, for he wanted to take an oath to become a monk.
In 1906, Nam mkha'rgyal mtshan was ordained in the presence of sMon rgyal
Nam mkhadbang rgyal in Dza khog. In his mind, he conceived the idea of building
a monastery at a certain rocky place
such as the meditation cave of the great lama Dran pa nam mkha', his foot-prints and
the like. Then a prophecy was made by the yogi A lo, and in accordance with it, in
1911 Nam mkha'rgyal mtshan went to seek the place where a new monastery should
be built.
It was a place with many auspicious signs, such as the following: to the right,
IHa ri spang mtho, whose summit consists of a crystal rock, at the front, Un chen dur
krod nor bu spungs ri and gNyan chen wara, which look like dextral white conchs;



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
and mountains, including, at the back, 'Bul ri, the gathering place of deities, the klu,
and the gnyan. As the place was filled with many springs, herbs and other auspicious
symbols, he decided to build a new monastery there, which he did in 1918. A brag
sNang gsal Monastery was thus established.
He then established the monastic discipline in the establishment with the
establishment of the Three Trainings. He made pilgrimages to many places, such
as the Four Divisions of Central Tibet (dbus gtsang ru bzhi), Ti se, Bon ri and so
forth. He studied various doctrines under many teachers, irrespective of their sects,
including 'Gro mgon Shes rab g-yung drung, bZod pa rgyal mtshan, and the great
treasure-discoverer of A dbang, Rig 'dzin rgya mtsho, who was a Buddhist priest. He
received from them the threefold lineages "initiation, transmission and explanation
of texts" of the entire doctrine of inner, outer and secret. All the good deeds he had
learned and performed over a decade led him to a state of knowledge of the most
excellent quality. Every sign of his achievement thrilled the common people. Since
he had obtained omniscience and omnipotence, he came to be known everywhere
as the one who would save all the people in this and the next life, by the designation
of A bla sNang gsal, from Khyung lung dNgul mkhar in the west to mTsho sngon in
Amdo in the east.
As for the account of his previous lives, his origin is traced back to Tshad
med 'od Idan in the time of gShen. The line then leads successively down to sTong
rgyung mthu chen in the time of Bla chen Dran pa nam mkha' in the early stage of
Bonpo dissemination, and sPyang sprul Nam mkha' rgyal mtshan in the latter stage
of Bonpo dissemination. To make the long story of his life short: he trained himself
in the three deeds of hearing, thinking and meditating, and moved on into the three
deeds of teaching, debating and writing; he preached extensively for his own sake
and for the sake of others, which was openly praised everywhere, in consequence of
which he turned into the one like the vast ocean of summer.
Main religious objects and activities of the monastery: Shar gling sham po lha rtse.
At the centre of this mezzanine-high building was a gilt-bronze statue of ston
pa Khri gtsug rgyal ba as tall as a mezzanine. There was also the sacred gilt-bronze
statue of gShen rab Mi bo accompanied on either side by the cubit-high Four
Principal Buddhas (bDe gshegs gtso bzhi),
On the sculptured wooden shelves to the right were the cubit-high Sixteen
Arhats (gNas brtan bcu drug) in gilt-bronze. Along the left wall was a varnished
wooden shelf with an outward appearance of Pho brang gling dgu, the Mandala
of Peace, and an inward appearance of the gSas mkhar bcu drug, the flame of the
potential nature of wrath. In front of ston pa gShen rab Mi bo was the cubit-high
silver statue of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan. Painted on the wall were murals
of the Thousand Buddhas. Such was the magnificence of this shrine's religious



objects.
bKa' 'gyur lha khang
On the right-hand side of this two-storey building was a life-sized gilt-bronze
statue of sMra ba'i seng ge, and on the left-hand side was that of Byams ma. Along
the walls on either side were three hundred volumes (po ti) of the bka''gyur of both
Buddhism and Bon, along with one hundred thumb-sized images of gShen rab made
of silver, and another nine hundred of copper,
sKu gdung khang, gYu rtse khang and dBu rtse khang
The two-storey sku gdung khang had a triple-headed stupa of Lo pan mchod
rten, which nearly reached the roof of the building, and murals of the Forty-five
Peaceful deities (Zhi tha zhe Inga).
g Yu rtse khang had a complete set of religious objects: at its centre was a statue
of 'Brug sras chem pa the height of an arrow, made of a compound of gold and
silver. To the right was a cubit-high silver statue of Phur pa together with another
nine of gilt-bronze. On both sides of Phur pa were one hundred stupas in gilt-bronze,
and on the walls were murals of the thousand gShen lha 'od dkar.
Similarly, dBu rtse khang was adorned with many religious objects. At its
centre was a gilt-bronze statue of gShen lha 'od dkar as tall as a two-storey house.
To the right and slightly in front of the statue was a magnificent, elaborately worked
gilt-bronze mandala, organized with holy elements to the height of a mezzanine,
It was constructed of, from the bottom, the following: the four continents, the four
islands; the seven mountains; the seven lakes; the abode of the Thirty-three gods,
where the temple rNam rgyal khang bzang was found; and, on the top, the Garuda
subduing the three worlds. To the left and slightly in front of gShen Iha 'od dkar was
a shrine of the Eighty-six Wrathful deities (Khro rgyal gya drug) in gilt-bronze. And
above the gShen tha 'od dkar were the Forty-five Peaceful Deities (Zhi lha zhe Inga)
in gilt bronze.
The construction of these five buildings, together with the fields around,
presented a resemblance to that of the heart of 'Ol mo lung ring, the Holy Land. The
beautiful and lovely scene of the purest land raises a deep faith and reverence in
one's mind when it comes into sight.
There were two meditation halls (sgrub khang), the old one and the new, with
many religious objects in each. In the old one was a gilt-bronze statue of sTag la me
'bar, a thangka of Srid pa'i rgyal mo and masks of some Bonpo guardian deities. In
the new one was a statue of the hundred-headed, thousand-armed IJang nag made
of gold and silver, and the Four Queens (rGyal mo mam bzhi) in gilt-bronze. There
were also thangka embroidered with silk, and many other religious objects.
Of the two residences (bla brang), the older one had the Thang gsas lha khang,



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngan regions
inside which were many religious objects, such as the following: a gilt-bronze statue
of rNam par rgyal ba; a gilt-bronze reliquary stupa of IHa bu, the father of sNang
gsal Rinpoche, murals of about five hundred figures of Thang gsas sgrol ma, a wheel
of life and the kings of the directions (rGyal chen sde bzhi); a statue of ston pa
made of pure gold, rediscovered in Kong po Bon ri by sNang gsal Nam mkha' rgyal
mtshan; an image of the diety Zhi ba a gsal, which was an old relic of the Khyung po
family, an Indian-made copper statue of gShen rab named "Black Gold of Thirteen
Horse Head" (gSer nag rta mgo bcu gsum); large and small conchs called dBu yang
Annual religious activities and monks of the monastery
1. During the three days from the 3rd to the 5th of the 1st month, a memorial
service was held in honour of mNyam med Shes rab rgyas mtshan, during
which assemblies were held to make flower-offerings.
2. From the 13th day of the 2nd month to the 18th of the 3rd month, prayers
were offered in a memorial service for sNang gsal Nam mkha'rgyal mtshan,
in the course of which an extensive procession of monks was arranged on the
27th day of the 2nd month.
3. From the 30th day of the 2nd month to the 18th of the 3rd month was the
period in which the rituals of skye sgo, rNam klong gnyis, and Zhi khro
were performed. From the 8th to the 15th of the 3rd month, the ritual cycle
of Khro bo and the recital of the Kanjur and Katen, were staged in the Shar
rtse Khang. The ritual of the Grub sman rnam bzhi, the hundred offerings of
Ma rgyud and other rituals were performed on a grand scale in the dBu rtse
khang. During the three days from the 15th, a large group of devotees of Bon
got together to enjoy the glory of the artistic religious dances performed by
the monks; these dances included sNa sel, Atsa ra, Sa'dul khro 'cham, Srid
rgyal dus drug, gZe ma dgu 'cham, Ha shang, Ma rgyud tshogs 'cham, Nga
chen mo, dPal mgon gral brgyad, Dur khrod gnas brgyad, the Snow Lion
(seng ge), the Tiger, the Leopard, the dBal stag, the dBal "brug, the dBal
g-yag and the dBal kyung.
4. In the 4th and 5th months, primary and principal instructions, along with
various other teachings, were given, as well as guidance on general and
detailed knowledge.
5. From the 6th to the 9th day of the 6th month, rituals rNam rgyal stong
mchod, g Yang skor and dGra lha dpang stod were performed. Similarly,
there was propitiation of mountain deities and circumambulation of holy
mountains, followed by a horseracing competition customarily organized
by the monastery and the A brag community. The competition was a social
occasion.
6. From the 13th to the 20th day of the 7th month rituals of Kun gsal byams
75



mali tshogs brgya and Yi dam kun dus las tshogs were performed
7. During the three months from the 8th month to the 10th, most of the monks
and lamas visited each village to give religious services, otherwise they
stayed in the monastery for daily tea.
8. From the 23rd to the 30th day of the 11th month, the dgu bzlog rite, based on
the ritual cycle of sTag la, was performed.
9. In the 12th month, from the 3rd to the Sth day, the bskang gsol ceremony was
held on a grand scale according to the Zhu tradition; from the 23rd to the
30th day, the dgu bzlog rite, based on the cycle of Phur pa, was held.
Formerly, the monastery had five hostels (khang tshan) each of which had a
lama and a teacher: the lama Tshul khrims blo Idan and the teacher rMa rong Thar
dkar in Shar rtse hostel, the lama Dwangs ra Zla zla and the teacher Seng ge in bka'
'gyur hostel, the lama Don nyid and the teacher bsTan tshul in sku gdung hostel, the
lama 'Bum thar and the teacher A 'jab in g Yu rtse hostel, and the lama Nam mkha'
g-yung drung and the teacher A chig in dBu rtse hostel. There were 139 monks.
The lama and teacher of each hostle took, in rotation, all the responsibilities for the
annual religious activities.
At present, this monastery consists of the following buildings: one temple with
one hundred long pillars, the assembly hall with four, the bKa' 'gyur khang four, and
the two meditation halls have four each; a new kitchen and more than thirty monks'
quarters have been built. Something that should be stressed is that a collection of
religious objects remains in perfect condition. It includes the following: the relies of
sNang gsal Nam mkha'rgyal mtshan; a mezzanine-high, three-headed stupa made of
a compound of gold and silver, a mezzanine-high gilt-bronze statue of gShen lha 'od
dkar; a life-sized gilt-bronze statue of Byams ma and a reliquary stupa of the lama
Nyi grags.
There are ten lamas and more than forty monks at present. The monastery's
main source of revenue is the circulation service around the village. It depends on
every household for support.
(10) Chab mdo Monastery
The monastery's full name is Chab mdo dgon dPal gShen bstan g-yung
drung bde chen gling. It is located in Shag chu xiang, in the south-eastern part
of the rdzong. Although it is no more than thirty kilometres from the rdzong to
the monastery, it takes about one and a half hours by car because of the bad road
condition. This is one of the Bonpo monasteries that has a long history. It was
destroyed in 1641 when Mongolian troops led by Gushri Khan bsTan 'dzin chos
rgyal invaded Tibet. Reconstruction was undertaken in 1917.
In the time of gNya' khri btsan po, the teachings of Bon became widespread
in Tibet. During this period, however, the monastery experienced a rise and fall,



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
and met with great misfortune in that many masters of Bon gshen scattered to mDo
khams and the nomad area because of the religious oppression by bТsan po Khri
srong Ide btsan. In the nomad area, those Bon gshen masters who had escaped
established many monastic communities in order to get a foot-hold there, so that
the precious teachings of Eternal Bon did not degenerate. At that time Khyung
po A bla grags pa and Sha ba rang grol, who both came from the upper Dwang
ra Khyung rdzong, established Sog gYung drung 'dzin pa'i gling monastery and
greatly increased the number of monks. The three deeds of keeping, defending and
spreading the precious teachings of Eternal Bon became widespread everywhere.
However, at the same time, Gushri bs Tan 'dzin chos rgyal first captured mDo
khams and then gradually penetrated g Isang by waging war against Karma bstan
skyong dbang po, the king of gTsang, and brought it under his control.
In 1642, the Tibetan government began to organize itself and the doctrine of the
dGe lugs pa sect began to spread widely in Tibet. Simultaneously, a large number
of monastic communities of the bka' rgyud pa and Eternal Bon were, as a matter
of course, destroyed by the military power of Gushri bsTan 'dzin chos rgyal. Many
Bonpo monks and nuns were ferociously tortured and eventually murdered. After
that, although Khyung po bs Tan rgyal grags pa, Khri bde gung grags and Khyung
po 'Bun snang tried their best to practise the three deeds "keeping, defending and
spreading the teachings" they gradually declined.
At that time, Khyung po Nang chen grags pa brought the statue Zhi kro rgyab
bkrod and other religious objects to A smad district and took care of the monastery
of Khyung po sВa nag bla brang, Khyung po sMan ri grags pa, gShen sras grags pa
and sNang gsal grags pa are said to have followed successively in the line of this Bla
brang.
A brag sPyi ba grags pa then put up a yak-hair tent on the pastureland so that
they could declare that their monastery was settled there. They raised funds and
scraped together enough monastic implements, including the offerings to the deities
and costumes for religious dance. Besides that, they also obtained many religious
objects such as the Zhi khro rgyab bkrod and other invaluable relics. Gathering a
number of devotees in the nomad area, they performed prayer services and rituals to
the satisfaction of the people.
There were about twenty, mostly tantric practitioners, but some of them were
real monks. They practised chanting and meditation. They performed religious
services based on the ritual cycles of dBal gsas, g Tso mchog, Phur pa, sTag la
and Byams ma. They also propitiated Srid pa rgyal mo drel nag, Mi bdud, A bse,
Gyal po Nyi pang sad and dra bla'i rgyal mo. Since they performed these rituals
extensively, the monastery became the object of worship for the people, for this life
and hereafter.
From among these lamas came bsTan 'dzin grags pa in the lineage of sBra nag



bla brang, who had accomplished complete deliverance from every attachment of
this world. But after his leaving for the purest land Bon dbyings (after his death),
even the sBra nag bla brang lineage fell into a state like that of a rosary broken into
pieces. Later on, this situation caused the sBra nag bla brang to invite, willingly or
unwillingly, lamas of the Khyung po lineage from A stod district.
About the same time, in 1880, dBang phyug g Yung drung tshul khrims, an
accomplished yogi of the Nag ru lineage, one of the three lineages of Khyung
po "White, Black and Yellow" was bom, emitting many auspicious signs. From
childhood, gYung drung tshul khrims had inborn knowledge quite unlike all other
children. Being a master in the fields of calligraphy and arithmetic, he became the
one most admired by all the laity and priests. When he grew up, he felt so deeply sad
about the cyclic existences that he made pilgrimages to Central Tibet, Mount Kailash
in Western Tibet, Bon ri in of Kong po; and when he visited monasteries including
sMan ri (No.), g Yung drung gling (No.2) and mKhar sna (No. 7) and he studied
under many matchless teachers to receive initiations and instructions of outer, inner
and secret. He then thoroughly learned the Sutra, Tantra and Dzogs chen. Adjusting
himself to the monastery, he took the full ordination of Drang srong, consisting of
256 vows.
A prophecy was made at that time by skal bzang nyi ma, the great abbot of
gYung drung gling, that a new monastery would be built in sNye rong district. In
accordance with the prophecy, a large group of devotees of Bon having united with
some leaders of Shag chu smad community in sNye rong rdzong apprised mKhan
chung Grags mam, the governor-general of Hor that they would establish Chab mdo
dPal gShen bstan gYung drung bde chen gling, which they did in 1917.
gYung drung tshul khrims maintained the monastery by the observation of
monastic discipline, such as the Three Trainings, in consequence of which he became
the very guide of the three deeds of keeping, defending and spreading the precious
teachings of gShen. Furthermore, he developed his unique abilities: he left a number
of handprints and footprints all around the monastery, including places on the hills in
front and at the rear; the flag of his reputation as Chab mdo rTogs Idan fluttered high
However, due to the unfortune of devotees, he died on the 23rd day of the 8th
month, 1947 with the signs of summer thunder booming through the sky above the
monastery.
After that, until the Cultural Revolution, the monastery was looked after by
his nephew, Bla chung tshe dpag of the Khyung po Nag ru family. During this time
the monastery was enlarged and the necessary religious objects, such as statues,
scriptures, stupas and implements of offerings, were greatly increased. Among many
Bonpo establishments, this monastery had the high reputation of having grown just
like a lotus that comes out of the mire.



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
Religious objects and rituals of the monastery:
sku gdung lha khang
The main religious object of this three-storey temple was the gilt-bronze
reliquary stupa of the sage of Chab mdo, g Yung drung tshul khrims, in the style
of the g Yung drung bkod legs stupa, as tall as a two-storey house. To its right was
a statue of Li shu about the same size as the stupa. Further to the corner was a
gilt-bonze statue of sMon lam mtha' yas. To the left of the stupa was a gilt-bronze
statue of Dran pa nam mkha' about the same size. Among these, there was also a
gilt-bronze statue of rNam par rgyal ba as high as the ceiling,
On the upper floor was a gilt-bronze statue of sTon pa gShen rab as high as the
ceiling, In front of it were religious objects that included the mandala, built at a cost
of two thousand Chinese yuan, the butter lamp stand that cost one thousand yuan,
a set of seven silver cups that cost one hundred yuan, the mandala of the Twelve
Rituals (Cho ga bcu gnyis), an embroidered thangka, and a great many other equally
sacred religious objects.
The assembly hall ('du khang)
At the centre of this two-storey building, which had fifty-two pillars, was a clay
image of rNam par rgyal ba as tall as the building itself. Beside it, on both sides,
were bronze statues of the four Buddhas and the four wrathful deities, and five large
golden thangkas of the Thousand Buddhas. There was also a chamber with 122
wooden stupas in it. In addition to these, the number of invaluable religious objects
in this building was beyond counting,
The Meditation hall (sgrub khang)
In this building there was a statue of the guardian Gyal po Shel khrabs and a
number of masks of other guardians.
The Lama's residence (bla brang)
of the two bla brang, the upper bla brang was a building of three storeys. It
consisted of bka' 'gyur khang, Zhabs brtan khang and Rig sngags lha khang. In the
two Rig sngags lha khang were small gilt bronze images of Byams ma, gDugs dkar,
Tag la me 'bar, Ma rgyud, Phur pa and many others.
The main religious object in the lower bla brang was the clay image of Gyal ba
rgya mtsho, about half the height of the ceiling. On either side of it were cubit-high
clay images of the Sixteen Arhats (gNas brtan bcu drug). In front of the relics of
the Sage gYung drung tshul khrims was a mandala, built at a cost of two thousand
Chinese yuan, small butter lamp stands of silver, silver water bowls in various sizes,
and many other things.



The Communal quarters (khang Ishan)
There were four khang fshan in Chab mdo Monastery: bDe chen smon grol,
"Dod 'byung phun tshogs, Lung rig grays rgyas and Srid gsum dbang bsgyur. There
were more than thirty rooms for the 102 resident monks.
Annual religious services of the monastery
1. The 2nd day of the 1st Tibetan month is the commemoration of mNyam med
Shed rab rgyal mtshan. Flower offerings are made for three days beginning
on that day.
2. During the five days from the 15th day of the 2nd month, there are assemblies
of the Twelve Rituals (Cho ga bcu gnyis).
3. In the 3rd month, assemblies are held for prayer services.
4. During the ten days from the 1st to the 10th day of the 4th month, a thousand
offerings of rNam rgyal are made; simultaneously, the dancers of the
monastery perform religious dances such as Gya nag Ha shang, Sa phyag,
rNam brgyad, Gya tsha, Ging 'cham, sTag la'i mga 'cham, Seng 'cham,
g Tor rgyag and others. These are very well performed in a manner perfectly
true to the origin
5. From the 13th to the 25th day of the 5th month there are recitals of the bka'
'gyur.
6. During the seven days from the Sth day of the 6th month each khang tshan
holds rituals to meditate on its own Yi dam. Concurrently with this, the lay
and clerical devotees propitiate the local deities and they enjoy the summer
festival by participating in competitive track events.
7. In the 7th month the Zhi khro ritual was performed
8. During the three days from the 23rd day of the 8th month, a memorial service
is held in honour of gYung drung tshul khrims, the sage of Chab mdo, and
flower offerings are made.
9. From the 3rd to the 10th day of the 11th month, the ritual cycle of Me riis
performed.
10. From the 3rd to the 30th day of the 12th month, two rituals of Khro bo and
Phur pa are simultaneously performed, finishing with the g Tor rgyag che mo
rite.
At present, there are three lamas and more than fifty ascetic monks in the
monastery. Its buildings include the temples, the assembly halls, a kitchen and
another building of about sixty pillars. Monks' quarters number more than twenty.
Moreover, the monastery is well equipped with the religious objects it needs. The
religious services and rituals are also practised in a manner true to the tradition.
(11) Sha ri Monastery
Dza dmar Shari dgon Dar rgyas gling is located in the southern Dza dmar



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
xiang, which covers the north-western part of sNye rong rdzong.
The monastery stands on top of a small hill, to the north of which stretches a
range of magnificent rocky mountains. The plain around the monastery is beautiful,
large and spacious. A great many people, both lay and clerical, would be fascinated
at the sight of it.
The monastery was founded in 1890 by bSod nams g-yung drung of the skam
clan. The story of the monastery's beginnings is as follows:
The great abbot of sMan ri (No. 1), bSod nams Ihun grub dbang gi rgyal po,
came to stay in rDza dmar in the Thirteenth Rab byung. During his stay he fasted
on the 10th day of every month, and made flower-offerings. Having seen this, some
senior Bonpo took it as being most important for them and adopted it as a part of
their collective works. The accomplished saint repeatedly shouted out an oath to the
territorial deities such as Rirgan Bum rdza se mo, and made them take vows so that
they would protect the peaceful communities.
Later, when the great abbot of sMan ri, Nyi ma bstan 'dzin, came to rDza dmar,
he not only urged and explained the necessity of building a monastery there, he also
made the most careful preparations he could afford.
Then another great abbot of mKhar sna (No.7), 'Gro mgron Shes rab g-yung
drung, came to rDza dmar and built a five-storey stupa at bkra shis na mo che. In
addition to this, he identified the sacred hill on which a monastery should be built,
and made a thorough investigation of the place.
The story of the origin of the name rDza dmar Shari goes as follows: Once
when gShen gSang ba 'dus pa captured some witches, he bound them all firmly to
a chicken-shaped rock, on the part that looked like the head of a bird. But two of
them, Me bza' brag sbyor and Chu bza' rlung sbyor, managed to escape, barely, and
disguised themselves as deer. Later, however, gSang ba 'dus pa killed them with his
sword, which made him famous as a deer hunter, Sha bari (hence the name Shari).
To the south of rDza dmar Shari there is a rocky mountain called Tshe bum in
which a number of treasures are kept, including the magical objects of sTag la me
'bar, the mysterious stick of 'Od ldan 'bar ba and the like.
To the east is Shel rdzong, the abode of Yum chen Thugs rje Byams ma. There is
also a cave called the Shel phug, the abode of Kun bzang Gyal ba'dus pa, in which
there are many self-grown (rang byon) letters on the rock and self-grown figures
of particularly eminent ones still visible. In 1892, skam bSod nams g-yung drung
founded rDza dmar Sha ri Monastery in accordance with the prophecy made by Shes
rab g-yung drung, undertaking mass fasting, which had previously been practised by
senior Bonpo on the 10th day of each month as the basis of their activities.
The altar and religious objects were completely renewed and the monastery was
looked after by mKhan nag bla chung, Khro bla skal bzang rgya mtsho, bZod pa dge
slong and A mchod Ge khod. Although bs Tan pa tshul khrims, who was then sent



from sMan ri, became widely known as the Sha ri abbot, the unfavourable climate
gave him no choice but to finally return to his home in Gyal rong.
The next to take care of the monastery was mTshams pa Shes rab. However,
to his misfortune, a gush of water from underground caused the temple and
the schoolhouse to be ruined. The monastery suffered greatly, on the brink of
annihilation.
At that time, in the course of a discussion involving officials, citizens and
monks, an expectation grew that sKam Tshe dbang 'gyur med (generally called
skam "Gyur dga' Rinpoche) would restore and maintain the monastery. They told
him the essentials of the discussion, which he fully accepted.
Tshe dbang 'gyur med was exceedingly venerable; he had taken the monastic
oaths in the presence of the abbot of Man ri, Phun tshogs blo gros, had studied
under many great teachers and had completed the quintessence of the three Sutra,
Tantra and Dzogschen. For the sake of all beings, he spread the teachings of gShen
widely, so that his fame reached every part of the Bonpo community. All Bonpo
experienced such heartfelt gratification that they respected him as their head.
He spent everything that had been given to him by many patrons and
proponents, lay and clergy, solely on good deeds. Since there was no choice but for
the monastery to be transferred to another place and rebuilt, the great abbot of sMan
ri, Nyi ma dbang rgyal, and some others inspected Nor bu gdong, the plain below Ri
rgan bum rdza. However, the officials, citizens and monks of rDza dmar all raised
an objection to this with the reason that the place was too far from Ge mo where the
lord Kham pa Ge khod resided, along with other reasons. A discussion was then held
among Tshe dbang 'gyur med, Zhwa khra 'Chi med, the chieftain ofrDza dmar, and
Kham pa Ge khod, the chieftain of Ge mo. They reached an agreement to build the
monastery midway between rDza dmar and Ge mo.
As almost all the religious objects of the monastery except for one set
manuscript of the bka' 'gyur and bka' brten and some fine incense had been
dispersed by that time, skam "Gyur dga' began to gather together the religious
objects and the people and the government of rDza dmar began to work on the
temple. Since they participated in the construction in this way, the religious objects
and the temple were soon nearly completed, when skam 'Gyur dga' was struck
down with an illness. Taking over his work, two of his disciples, bSod nams lhun
grub and Nam mkha'rgyal mtshan of the skam clan, completed the task
With respect to the family of skam, it is known to be in the line of the sGo, one
of the five great clans of early Tibet: sGa, Go, gDong, dBra and 'Bru. The forefather
of the skam transformed himself into a deity's offspring called Gaba mdangs ldan,
and descended to this world for the sake of religious trainees, so that they would be
led by the clear light of the deity. In order to tame the devil Bhyo ra nag po, he came
down to a place called Yul bla ra na se with a turquoise drum booming in his hand.



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
There he was known by the name of sGo rgyal Iha bon thod dkar.
The reason why he was known by the name of skam is as follows: there was
once a time when the lake Dwang ra g-yu mtsho overflowed naturally, and sGo rgyal
Iha bon thod dkar appeared and demonstrated his acquired ability by drying up the
flood. After this, his clan came to be called by the name of Kam (which means
drying).
Subsequently, in some districts, including Dwang ra g-yu mtsho, De dge, and
Hor Bra chen, men of the skam family through successive generations became the
most talented leaders. It is said that that there have been some 180 masters in the
skam family, such as sGo A lod shig gzan, gYung drung nyi rgyal, the tutor of Nyi
ma bstan'dzin, the great abbot of Man ri: Kam Khro rgyal grags pa, Nyi ma rgyal
mtshan, the abbot of So brgyad, and others.
The way in which the skam family formed the foundation of prosperity in the
Hor sBra chen district was as follows: Once when a quarrel was provoked in the
sDe dge district between skam bsTan 'dzin gtsug phud and Ga lhug, the chieftain
of dkar shul, they asked the king of sDe dge at IHa thog to deal with it. Kam
bs Tan 'dzin gtsug phud won the decision that the monastery should be exempt from
taxation. Hearing this, the chieftain of dKar shul developed a hatred for him, and
threatened that no monk would be allowed in the monastery. However, skam bsTan
'dzin gtsug phud felt generous enough to leave an excellent mark at the rTsi chu
river as witness of his spiritual accomplishment. The Hor lineage eagerly wanted to
leave for rTa sgo in upper Nag tshang. However at that time, Nyi ma rgyal mtshan,
the elder son of the religious teacher of the Klu phug monastery in the Hor Bra
chen district, repeatedly expressed his hope that he would fix his permanent abode
in Hor Brachen. Because of this, skam bs Tan 'dzin gtsug phud took up permanent
residence in the Hor sBra chen district so that he could give full support to the hope
of Nyi ma rgyal mtshan. Descendants of skam gradually increased and the teachings
of gShen became widespread in Dza dmar in the sNye rong district. The reputation
of the skam family thus came to be widely known in HorsBra chen,
Structure and religious objects of the monastery
The monastery consisted of the following buildings: the assembly hall with four
long pillars and sixteen short ones; two temples, rNam rgyal lha khang and Dran pa
lha khang, each with four long pillars and four short ones; the two-storey bla brung:
the meditation hall; and the large quarters for monks.
Formerly, this monastery possessed an abundance of religious objects including
the following: a sacred gilt-bronze statue of gShen rab Nam par rgyal ba as tall as a
two-storey house, the Four Buddhas of gilt-bronze and a gilt-bronze statue of gShen
rab Mi bo. In the Dran pa lha khang were the reliquary stupas of skam 'Gyur dga
and some other relics.



Among the many religious objects, the ones of particular importance were the
following: the treasure-trove statue of sTon pa gShen rab; the big conch called bkra
shis 'od 'bar, multiple relics called Yid bzhin dbang gi rgyal po; three small tsha tsha
clay images belonging to 'Chi med Dran pa, the father and sons; the golden flat-bell
of self-deliverance; the self-grown white letter A, found in rТsa ri mtsho dkar by
Karma pa Rang byung rdor rje; the footprint of mKha' 'gro Klu yang sgong brgyad;
the silver statue of gShen lha 'od dkar called bkra shis 'od 'bar, rediscovered by
Nyag gter gSang sngags gling pa; the "red gold" stupa discovered by Khro tshang
'brug lha in the rDzu 'phrul phug cave on Mt. Ti se; the self-grown image of Zhi ba
Kun tu bzang po, which came out of the teeth of a Shel sku Khro bo rgyal mtshan;
the self-grown image of gShen lha, which appeared on the skull of Khyung po
Gyer chen zla med; "six relics of the six directions"; and a phur pa dagger made of
bronze.
There were also a great many precious manuscripts including a high quality set
of bka' 'gyur and bKa'brten, the Khams brgyad, the Mi nuh mishan mdo and the
Dri med gzi brjid.
Annual religious activities and rituals
This monastery followed various traditions such as that of Zhu, Bru and the New
Tradition.
1. In the 1st Tibetan month a fast was performed,
2. In the 6th month there was an annual festival during which an assembly
was held on the 10th day, concurrently with which a religious dance was
performed.
3. During the three months from the 10th to the 12th, the dgu gtor rite was
performed once each month, three times in all. In the old days when the
monastery flourished, there were monthly prescribed services.
At that time, this monastery was an establishment where there were both monks
and tantric practitioners. There were about twenty monks and some sixty trantric
practitioners.
It is said that there were the eighty generations of Bonpo tantric practitioners
of Dza dmar". Some of these must have observed the tantric vows properly.
Among the monks there were many who observed their vows strictly. The famous
chanting master of Man ri, called the Teacher sBa ba, was also a monk from Shari
Monastery.
At present, this monastery has eight lamas and twenty-five monks whose
conditions are good in every respect.
(12) rTing ngu Monastery
Sog rTing ngu bon dgon Nor bu gling is located in Khro bo la xiang, to the



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
north-east of sNye rong rdzong. It is about eighty kilometres from the rdzong to the
monastery. As the road is very bad, it is impossible to get there by car in summer.
Even on horseback it is an extremely difficult task to reach it.
The monastery was founded in 1748 by lHun grub dbang Idan. He was born in
1703 in the sDe dge district of Khams. From childhood, he had innate knowledge
and intelligence of remarkable lucidity. He devoted himself to the practice of
meritorious deeds. He had love and compassion for all religious trainees. In the
manifestation of right discernment that he displayed he was quite unlike any other
child.
When he reached the appropriate age, he received the most careful initiations
and transmissions of Sutra and Tantra in the presence of the great abbot of sMan ri,
gYung drung tshul khrims. Having done this, he made rapid progress in practising
meditation. He circumambulated the holy mountains in Amdo and Central Tibet,
regardless of the schools they belonged to. At the same time, he studied under
many excellent masters of several monasteries. Since he respected them as his chief
masters and received profound initiations, text-transmissions and religious teachings,
he reached a state worthy of praise from everyone.
Then he went to see lHo rTogs Idan dkar po, whose name was widely known.
He prostrated himself, bowed his head and asked for blessed initiation and teachings.
Ho rTogs Idan dkar po said,
"O You, the noble one, protector of fortunate religious beings!
Having easily obtained selfhood without searching or exertion,
Today we have met here naturally without motivation,
You have had the fate [to see me] pulsing in your veins without fading,
The fate of sentient beings lies on you; I shall tell you without concealment,
You are the one called the Possessor of Self-created Power (Hun grub dbang
Idan) of Ha thog,
Act true to your name, and you will gain the ear of all the people."
Following the instruction, Hun grub dbang ldan continued reciting prayers and
devoted himself to making pilgrimages and sitting in hermitages, carrying with him
the scriptures and a medical kit. Then he went northward, close to the yak hair tent
of the chieftain of the Sog community, and asked for alms.
There were three brothers in the chieftain's family: the elder, middle and
younger, whose names were, respectively, Khro bo rgyal, Khro bo dar and Khro bo
srung. At that time, Khro bo rgyal, the elder one, had been suffering from an illness
for a year, during which all medical care and religious rituals had no effect at all. The
three brothers invited the saint lHun grub dbang dan into their tent, and the elder
one, Khro bo rgyal, said,
"Happiness is welling up inside me at the very sight of you,
Flowing through my body is energy that I have never felt before,



I would like to remember what name you bear,
I prostrate myself with reverence,
I wonder what caused me to suffer from illness,
I beg from you the best divinatory service to turn my illness away."
Hun grub dbang Idan said in reply: "I am the one called IHun grub dbang Idan,
but I am not the one who tells whether the divination comes out good or bad. What
I can do for you is to give you medical treatment." Then he made an examination
of urine and faeces, and gave the most careful medical treatment to satisfy the elder
brother's wishes.
Forty-nine days later the patient finally got far better than their expectation,
which, at the same time, raised faith and reverence in the brothers' minds. Though
they repeatedly asked him what kind of thing he wanted as a doctor's fee, he said
"I do not need any kind of doctor's fee, but I have a wish to build a monastery in
accordance with the prophecy made previously by the superior saint. Therefore I
shall request you to give me a small piece of land where a monastery could be built.
The three brothers were so happy to hear his words that they said, "We shall do as
you tell us."
Then the saint lHun grub dbang Idan, accompanied by the three brothers,
went on to examine all the area under their jurisdiction within the Sog district,
and encamped for a night at a place called Pha bong thang, where they saw many
auspicious manifestations that night.
Therefore, in 1797, a decision was made to establish a monastery on this
distinctive land. The future monastery was given a good name, the Glorious Nor bu
gling, and an elaborate purification ritual was performed.
With regard to the surroundings of this square piece of land, they appear to be
very good, described as follows: to the east is the protective mountain Gya stag khro
bo, a white rocky mountain with the appearance of a haughty tiger that is thirsty,
to the north is the protective Rus sbal ser po, a meadowy hill shining like a hero's
helmet, to the west is the protective Bya dmar mtshal lu, a beautiful scarlet hill of
slate mingled with verdigris, to the south is the protective g Yu 'brug sngon po, a blue
rocky mountain sticking high into the sky.
All the lamas, leaders, patrons and priests were summoned, and worked without
being lazy or negligent. Because of this, they managed to build the assembly hall
of the monastery within the very year of the decision being taken. Not only that,
by mutual agreement among the assembled monks of the Three Trainings, they
increased the number of monks from four to six, then gradually from six to thirteen.
In the early days, when there were only four monks, they were called the four
young qualified ones" (mTshan Idan khye'u bzhi), when six, the six gShen who
guide the beings" ('Dul ba gShen drug), and when increased to thirteen, they came
to be known everywhere as the thirteen gShen" (Ye gshen bcu gsum). From that



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngar regions
time, the Bon doors of outer, inner and secret were opened and the great tradition of
the teachings of chanting services and meditation came to be established, especially
the rNam rgyal and gYung drung klong rgyas which were performed according to
the tradition established by the former adepts. This contributed to the increase of the
monastery's activities and the spread of Eternal Bon.
The lineage of the monastery is as follows:
1. lHun grub dbang Idan, the founder of the monastery
2. Gyal tshab lHun grub 'od zer
3. bkra shis tshul khrims
4. Tshul khrims 'od zer
5. dPal ldan tshul khrims
6. gYung drung rgyal ba
7. mChog gyur grub dbang bsTan 'dzin rin chen nam mkha' bde chen snying po
8. bsTan 'dzin rgyal dbang
9. bs Tan 'dzin Ihun grub
10. Kun dga' dbang ldan
11. Kun mkhyen Sangs rgyas grags pa
12. mNyam med Tshul khrims grags pa
13. bsTan pa'i nyi ma
The size of the monastery and its religious objects
Du khang ka dgu ma
At the centre of this assembly hall, built by bs Tan 'dzin rin chen bde chen
snying po, was a gilt-bronze statue of Nam par rgyal ba, about the height of an
eight-year-old child. On the shelves on either side of the statue were some eighty
poti of bka' 'gyur written in a mixture of gold and silver. On the walls were murals
of the Thousand Buddhas.
sKu gdung nha khang dmar bkod ma
At the centre of this two-storey reliquary temple was a gilt-bronze statue, as tall
as the ceiling, of sTon pa Khri gtsug rgyal ba sitting on the throne. On either side of
the statue were rows of four gilt-bronze reliquary stupas of Karu grub dbang bs Tan
'dzin Ihun grub, Gyal tshab bsTan 'dzin dbang rgyal and bs Tan 'dzin Ihun grub, and
the tomb, in the style of the gYung drung bkod legs stupa, of a senior master of the
gShen lineage, about the height of the ceiling. Similarly, there were murals of the
Twelve Rituals (Cho ga bcu gnyis).



bka 'gyur lha khang
In the bka''gyur lha khang, built by Kun mkhyen Sangs rgyas grags pa, was a
number of religious objects such as the gilt-bronze tomb, in the style of the gYung
drung bkod legs stupa, of sKyab mgon bsTan "dzin Thun grub. To the right of the
tomb was a life-sized gilt-bronze statue of sMra ba'i seng ge, the deity of wisdom.
To the left was a life-sized gilt-bronze statue of Yum chen Shes rab byams ma. On
the shelves along the walls on either side were complete sets of the bka' 'gyur and
bKa'brten. There were, as well, many other sacred objects, including stupas.
IHa khang Khri smon lha rtse
At the centre of this two-storey, twenty-pillared building was a gilt-bronze
statue of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan. To its right was a gilt bronze statue of
Tshad med 'od Idan, and further towards the corner was a gilt-bronze statue of Kun
dga' dbang Idan. To the left of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan was a gilt-bronze
statue of 'Brug sras chem pa, and towards the comer were gilt-bronze statues of the
Four Buddhas (bDe gshegs gtso bzhi). In front of mNyam med was the tomb of Hun
grub dbang dan in the style of the gYung drung bkod legs stupa. On the eastern
walls were murals of paternal and maternal figures of Bonpo guardian deities. In the
gNas brtan lha khang upstairs was a complete mural of the Sixteen Arhats (gNas
brtan bcu drug); drawn there, as well, were many kinds of diagrams with poetic
verses written in them (sNyan ngag gi sgra 'khor)
sku gdung lha khang
In this building, built by mNyam med Tshul khrims dbang rgyal grags pa, was
a gilt-bronze tomb, in the style of the g Yung drung bkod legs stupa and as tall as a
two-storey building, of Kun mkhyen Sangs rgyas grags pa.
There were many marvellous murals: on the walls on either side of the tomb
were gShen lha 'od dkar, at the porch were the Ten Guardian Deities (Phyogs skyong
beu) and above the porch were the Twelve Deeds (mDzad pa bcu gnyis) of gShen
rab.
Kun bzan rgyal ba 'dus pa'i lha khang
At the centre of this large three-storey temple, built by mNyam med Tshul
khrims dbang grags, was a gilt-bronze statue, as tall as a two-storey house, of
Kun bzang rgyal ba'dus pa with five faces and ten hands. To the right of it was a
gilt-bronze statue of Nam mkha'i lha mo, and to the left was a gilt-bronze statue of
Byams ma. On the walls were murals of the Thousand Buddhas (bDe gshegs stong
sku)



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chardo and Ngari regions
Dzam gling dpal 'bar'du khang
On the ground floor, at the centre of the inner temple of this large eight-pillared,
three-storey assembly hall, built by mNyam med Tshul khrims dbang grags, was a
gilt-bronze statue of rNam par rgyal ba. To the left of it was a gilt-bronze statue of
Shes rab byams ma.
On the first floor up, at the centre, was a gilt-bronze statue, as high as the
ceiling, of Gyal ba rgya mtsho with a thousand hands and a thousand eyes. To the
right of it was the Wheel of Time (dBang ldan Dus kyi 'khor lo), and at the back
of it were the images of the Twelve Rituals (Cho ga bcu gnyis). Further to the right
corner was a stupa of bKra shis sgo mang, as high as the ceiling. To the left of Gyal
ba rgya mtsho was a gYung drung bkod legs stupa. Further to the left comer was a
gilt-bronze statue of rNam par rgyal ba, as tall as a two-storey house, accompanied
by the Eight Glorious Protectors (dPal mgon brgyad) at the back.
In one room on the top floor was a mural of mNyam med. In another room
were murals of the thousand sTag la me 'bar and the Thousand Buddhas, between
which were murals of the hundred-and-twenty mandalas. Similarly, another room
had a figure and a mural of a Bonpo protective deity. Another room had murals
of the master Pad ma 'byung gnas, the Lord Tsong kha pa, and the line of thirteen
reincarnations of the Dalai Lama. A mural of a complete set of the Sixteen Arhats
(gNas brtan beu drug) was drawn in the last room on the top floor.
The Lama's residence (bla brang)
The residence was a two-storey building with ten rooms. At the centre of the
chapel upstairs was a gilt-bronze statue of Dran pa nam mkha', and on the wall was
a mural of Yi dam Sram dkar khyung ba. On the shelves behind the statue were
volumes of scriptures of many kinds. In the meditation hall on the ground floor were
several figures of Bonpo protective deities, masks, murals and many other sacred
objects.
Annual religious activities and rituals
1. In the 1st Tibetan month, flower offerings were made and the ritual based on
the risa sgrup bla ma sgrup pa was performed, as well as the recitation of
the bka''gyur and Ka'brten.
2. On the 13th day of the 4th month, the recitation of the gSer 'od gzugs chen
nyi ma shar 'bum, the Yab sras tshogs 'khor, the stong yung brngan bsang
and the renewal ceremony of gSas khang kha bstod, and invocation of Gra
Iha, Lam lha and the Yul lha of the four directions.
3. About the 6th month, sacrificial offerings to the Bonpo protective deities
were elaborately made in rituals such as the bZlas chog bum sgrub, the ritual
rNam rgyal stong mchod, the Khro phur zhang gsum and others. There were
89



performances of various artistic dances such as rNam brgyad gar 'cham,
Zhwa nag tshogs 'cham, brTan srung "bag 'cham, dPa' bo'i ging 'cham and
gYung drung dgu 'cham, performed in a way that can hardly be imagined.
4. In the 10th month, chanting services were performed in the most profound
manner; there was a complete programme for the ritual performances of sTag
la me 'bar, as well as that of Byams ma.
5. In the 12th month the following rituals were performed: the great dgu gtor
rite; the evocation of the two tutelar dieties, Khro bo and Phur pa; the mdos
ritual based on the Khro bo ngo mishar rgyas pa; and the srung zlog ritual in
which the deity 'Brug gsas chem pa is invoked. Moreover, there were artistic
events that featured various dance performances such as Zhwa nag tshogs
'cham, bsTan srung "bag'cham and dPa' bo'i ging 'cham.
Presently there are two lamas and more than one hundred monks in this
monastery. The temple, assembly hall and other buildings are held up by fifty-five
pillars in all, and the monks' quarters consist of one hundred and ten individual
rooms.
This monastery has an abundance of religious objects including the tombs of
the successive lamas of this monastery, the relics of the saint mNyam med, scriptures
and a great many other objects. Annual religious services and rituals are practised as
they were in former ancient times.
(13) gSang sngags rtse Hermitage
The gSang sngags rtse Hermitage is located in g Yu rtse xiang, west of the sNye
rong rdzong. The hermitage has a certain number of religious objects. Three monks
are under training here.
(14) Gyal po shel khur Hermitage
This hermitage is in Be gzhung xiang, north-east of the sNye rong rdzong.
Twenty-four monks and two lamas reside here. Considerable difficulties lie on the
way to the hermitage.
After arriving from sNye rong rdzong at the uneven Qinghai-Tibet highway,
one must travel nineteen kilometres along the highway and then leave it and head
west. From there it is about 176 kilometres to dPal mgon rdzong. It is a very
difficult road to travel and the trip takes more than six hours by car. However, there
are several stopping places, like tea houses or petrol stations run by the local people,
which make the going very convenient for pilgrims.



mTsho-sngon
1/920,000
Nye tong
County
Ting-agui
Khra-bo-lad
A-mdo County
"Dom-rgyang
Hon
Sog-gzhung
SGo-gzhung
Sangs-lung
SA-bags
Sa-ser
sBra-chen County
sNye-rong-lung
C hab-mda
Shari
far-rdzone
Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
Ser-chen
slike rivera
'Bri-ru County
County Sent
Township Seat
Administrative Village
Monastery
County Border
River
---
gYurtse
Nyima
Road
Nag-chu County
Footpath



(9) Nang gsal Monastery
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)
(10) Chab mdo Monastery
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
(11) Sha ri Monastery
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)
6མས་བུའི་
གཡཔqམasd
༢gཔལཆ་བདw《མཚམ
མས་དགསོ་སའི་
དབྱརཚེས་བསྐུལ་པ་ལས་བ་
བའི་འམདམིགསོད་
གཞཞདོན་གནད་སྨིན་ཏེ་སྐགཡུ་བས་བུ་
ཏིཡེསལེན་དུ་
(12) Ting ngu Monastery, Plate 1 A stone-carved Matri at the monastery
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)



90.
US
(12) Ting ngu Monastery, Plate 2 The zhwa nag dance at the monastery
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
dPal mgon rdzong
dPal mgon rdzong is situated between the two celebrated lakes, Ser gling
mtsho and gNam mtsho, on the Northern Plateau of Tibet. Higher in elevation to
the north and lower to the south, the rdzong is blessed with beautiful mountains and
large areas of pastureland.
The rdzong is 101,992 square kilometres in area, 14,500 mu of which is
pastureland. With a population of about 29,000, the rdzong has one qu and eighteen
xiang under its direct control. There are one hundred and four village committees in
the rdzong, as well as one Bonpo and nine Buddhist monasteries.
During the time of the Qing dynasty, dal mgon rdzony was a part of gNam ru
rdzong, classified into one of the four tribes on the Northem Plateau, and was taken
care of by the Am ban, the Manchu official in Tibet. The regional government of
dPal mgon rdzong was established in 1959.
(15) Shel phug Monastery
dPal gShen bstan Shel brag phug pa monastery is located in Khyung shog
xiang, the southeastern part of dPal mgon rdzong. Although it is fifty-four kilometres
from the rdzong, one can reach the monastery within an hour by car as the road is in
good condition.
The monastery was founded by mKha' yag g Yung drung ye shes in 1716. He
was a distinguished master who started on a pilgrimage from sGang ru in Khyung po
and eventually entered the cave Shel brag phug pa, where he practised meditation
After sitting there for three years, when he reached the age twenty-five, he built a
new private room, kitchen and storehouse at 'Bum pa near the cave. In addition, he
named the site Shel phug, "Crystal Cave", and stayed there for several more years.
When he reached the age of forty-seven, the Mongolian troops of Jungar
invaded the region, inflicted extreme brutalities, and finally killed him by beheading,
They plundered all his properties.
The story of the Mongolian troops is told in many legends. One relates that
when the Mongolian troops arrived below the hill of Shel phug, bs Tan grags, the
cook, invoked the goddess Srid pa rgyal mo, who brought a storm of iron hail down
upon them, which consequently caused many deaths among the Mongolian troops.
In 1747, Rig 'dzin Zangs skyong dbang po Tshul khrims bstan'dzin, the
reincarnation of mKha' yag gYung drung ye shes, was born in Teng chen, Khyung
po dar ru. From childhood he recognized himself as the reincarnation and when he
reached the age of nine, he left on a journey to sTod in search of his own monastery.
Upon arriving at Shel phug he said, "This is my seat", and he stayed there for
thirteen years as a hermit, practising meditation. He said that it was necessary to
build Shel phug Monastery at the very site where the hermitage lay.
Later, at the age of thirty-three, he made a pilgrimage to Kong po Bon ri and



other places. When he came back, after travelling for three years, he again devoted
himself to meditating in the hermitage. He was sixty-eight when he died.
A long time passed before the birth of the next reincarnation took place. During
this period, there was a hermit called Nang do mtshams chen, who was reincarnation
of Li shu. He spent many years practising meditation in the hermitage. He piously
consecrated the place
Then in 1831, the third master in the line of incarnation, bs Tan 'dzin od
zer rgyal mtshan, was born in a family called sDe rnying Nor lha tshang. He was
enthroned as soon as he was recognized as the reincarnation by sNang ston Zla ba
rgyal mtshan (1796-1862).
At the age of nineteen, he constructed at the cave a new red-painted meditation
hall, Zhi khro lha khang, kitchen and storehouse. He also renewed part of the
monastic equipment.
It was during his time that an agreement was made that this monastery should
be a branch of Ra lag gYung drung gling (No.2) and he devoted his whole life
to meditating on his tutelary dieties in all their aspects and was able to call upon
religious protectors such as Ma, bDud and bТsan. He strongly advised against
making a distinction between the teachings of Buddhism and Bon. He died at the age
of eighty-four.
In 1879, the fourth in the line of incarnation, skal bzang bstan 'dzin gragspa,
was born in the vicinity of the monastery. He had only his mother when he decided
to go to gYung drung gling in order to be ordained as a monk. Having done this, he
later took full ordination.
Then, at Shel phug Monastery, he built an eight-pillared assembly hall
with a complete entrance hall and five rooms upstairs, a meditation hall, another
three-roomed building, a kitchen, a residence for the head of the monastery (bla
brang). He spent his whole his life looking after the monastery. He maintained the
doctrine of non-differentiation between Buddhism and Bon. He lived to the age of
eighty years.
In 1915, a boy was bom to be recognized as the reincarnation. The recognition
was made by Shes rab blo Idan, the 5th abbot of g Yung drung gling, who gave
him the name Shes rab bstan'dzin rgyal mtshan. He was the fifth in the line of this
monastery, and was enthroned at the age of five. He built a bla brang and greatly
spread the teachings of Eternal Bon. In 1945, motivated by the prophetical words of
sTag lung sgrol sprul chos sgrol (alias sTag lung mkha 'gro), he revealed Shel brag
as a sacred site. In 1948 he established the ritual called bDud rtsi bum sgrub, and
among the hills behind the monastery he hid twenty-five sets of treasure bottles of
all-wish-fulfilling
On the whole, it was during the days of the dGe slong skal bzang bstan'dzin
grags pa and Shes rab bstan 'dzin (rgyal mtshan) that the monastery flourished
96



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
vigorously. e
The main religious objects of this monastery in those days were the life-sized
gilt-bronze statues of Buddhas of the three ages and another two-cubit-high Buddha,
a life-sized silver statue of rNam par rgyal ba, a gilt-bronze statue of Byams pa
five cubits tall, a life-sized gilt-bronze statue of Nang ston Zla ba rgyal mtshan, a
cubit-high statue of sGrol ma, clay images of many kinds, two gilt-bronze reliquary
stupas bigger than a person, eight sets of wooden stupas, many poti of scriptures, and
sixty-seven thangka of the Twelve Rituals (Cho ga bcu gnyis), tutelary dieties and
religious protectors.
There were also implements used in making offerings, such as various water
bowls and butter lamp stands made of silver or copper, eight silver vases and eight
complete sets of costumes for religious dances.
At that time, this monastery had such treasures as these, and fifty-three monks
under training.
Annual activities and rituals
1. During the days from the 24th of the 12th Tibetan month to the 6th of the 1st
month, there were many rituals including the dgu gtor rite and the thousand
offerings.
2. For more than a month, from the 29th day of the 3rd month to the 8th day of
the 5th month, the monks gathered together for prayers.
3. During the whole period from the 29th day of the 6th month to the end of the
7th month, a summer fast was observed.
4. Assemblies were held for twenty-one days of the 8th month,
5. Assemblies were customarily held for seven days of the 11th month.
To sum up, 149 days of the year were spent practising the regular
above-mentioned services.
This monastery raised a considerable number of livestock, including according
to one record 379 cattle, 698 sheep and 593 goats as a source of income.
At present, the number of monks is twenty-five. There is an assembly hall and a
temple containing religious objects which are kept in very good condition.
Next, one must go to Nag tshang Nyi ma rdzong. It is 381 kilometres from dPal
mgon rdzong to Nyi ma rdzong and, moreover, it is very difficult to get through the
mud before reaching the highway. To relate our experience, it was too difficult for
us to find our way and we wound up facing a serious problem: after finding an old,
wide road, we proceeded one kilometre, depending completely on a map, when we
found we had lost our way. We did not know what to do as we were at an empty
place without a single person around, where we could see nothing but the sky above,
the ground below. It was after a good while that we happened to meet a kind-hearted
nomad, who knew the area and was able to help us. Following his guidance, we went



back about ten kilometres eastward, turned to the left, went another ten kilometres
straight north, and finally came upon the highway from Amdo to mNga'ris. After
driving eighty kilometres on the highway, we saw a by way which led us to Nag
tshang Nyi ma rdzong.
The highway is good and wide, with many services such as tea houses, small
grocery shops, petrol stations and guesthouses along the way. These services provide
comfort to pilgrims.



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
A-mdo County
dPak mgon County
sPo-rong
6 De'u- po
7 Phi- bu
Nag-chu
County
shekubur
Phring-lung
Khyung-gshog
sPo-ches
Shan-rtsa County
gNammisho
She 'khyer
Dec
Dam-gzhung County
County Seat
&
Township Seat
©
Administrative Village
Monastery
County Border
River
Road
1/2.290,000
Footpath



(15) Shel phug Monastery
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)
100



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
Nyi ma rdzong
Nyi ma rdzong lies to the west of Nag chu. It once belonged to the Nag tshang
tribe, which gave it the name Nag tshang Nyi ma rdzong, which has now become
familiar to many people of this area. Late in the 17th century, it was governed by
the Tibetan government, and functioned as an important access point for travelling
to mNga' ris, Nepal, Ladakh and other places. It is now possible to reach sGer tse
rdzong in mNgaris by car in one day or less.
Nyi ma rdzong has an area of about 150,000 square kilometres and a population
of about 30,000. Two qu, thirteen xiang and ninety-nine villages are under the
immediate supervision of this rdzong.
This area is surrounded by mountains, such as the Kun lun mountain range
in the north and the sacred snow mountain Ti se in the south, and the land is, on
average, more than five thousand metres above sea level.
In this region, at present, there are many places of pilgrimage: three Buddhist
monasteries, including 'Gro dpal bDe chen 'gyur med gling: four Bonpo monasteries,
including 'Om bu bSam gtan gling; as well as the mountain rTa sgo and the lake
Dwang ra g-yu mtsho. This is also a perfect treasure house of mineral resources and
animals, both carnivorous and herbivorous. The district was established as Nyi ma
rdzong in 1983.
(16) 'Om bu bSam gtan gling Monastery
'Om bu bSam gtan gling is in 'Om bu xiang, seventy-six kilometres south-west
of Nyi ma rdzong. This xiang lies on the norther side of the lake Dwang ra g-yu
mtsho.
The monastery was established by bSod nams g-yung drung around 1890. He is
regarded as one of the Thirteen Spiritual Leaders of Lake Dwang ra (Dwang ra g-yu
mtsho'i 'gro 'dren bcu gsum) and belonged to the lineage of Guru. This lineage is
traced back to Guru gYung drung phun tshogs, from which it descends to bZod pa
and down to the Guru 'Od zer, who is the fourth in the line.
The main religious objects are the sacred statues of Bla chen Dran pa nam
mkha' with his twin sons. It is said that there used to be an important old manuscript
called Bya rgod mchu bris (written with the beak of vulture").
Every year in the 1st Tibetan month, a large-scale, prescribed service of the bum
sgrub ritual is held, during which the monks meditate mainly on the deity Khro bo.
Otherwise, services on a smaller scale are performed frequently.
In the old days there used to be more than twenty monks, but now there are no
more than ten monks and one lama; the present condition of the monastery is not as
good as it was previously.
Some degree of restoration was carried Guru 'Od zer. The main source of
income, to maintain the monks and the lama. is donations from each household and
101



the performance of religious services in the village.
Gya rgod xiang lies thirteen kilometres away. The road is convenient for
driving between the two xiang, 'Om bu and Gya rgod, and Gya rgod xiang has
good facilities for travellers. We met more than one hundred pilgrims who were
on their way to Ser zhig Monastery (No. 19) or Mount Ta sgo, and we took many
pictures of each other.
(17) gYu bun Monastery
The monastery is in the eastern part of rTa sgo xiang. It is a whole day's ride on
horseback from the rTa sgo xiang. The location of this Bonpo monastic community
is an earthly sphere of purity in the middle of Zhang zhung.
More than three thousand years ago, there was a group of eighty great masters
of Eternal Bon, the first ten of which, the gShen, reigned over the area. Among the
ten gShen was Mu khri btsan po, the son of gNya' khri btsan po, who had a very
high regard for the teachings of Eternal Bon. During Mu khri btsan po's time, the
thirty-seven tantric communities ('Du gnas so bdun) were established. Dwang ra g Yu
bun Monastery was founded in the places where the Gangs gnyan rta sgo and Dwang
ra'i mtsho 'gram of the thirty-seven communities were situated.
The place where the monastery is found is, moreover, one of the twenty-four
sacred places mentioned in the Bonpo Ma rgyud tantra. The self-grown five
jackal-headed mKha' 'gro can still be seen in this place, as stated in the text of the
Ma rgyud tantra
The sPyi spungs khro bo dbang chen states that Sad ne ga'u of Zhang zhung
trained himself in Dwang ra g Yu bun. This implies that it was Sad ne ga'u of Zhang
zhung sgo pa who first established gYu bun Monastery. He is one of the thirteen
masters found among the eighty adepts of the Bon tradition.
Sad ne ga'u was born in Zhang zhung. His father was Gyal mtshan bde ba and
his mother was Gyal bza' klong yang. He studied under several teachers, like A nu
phrag thag, so that he was finally able to accomplish his learning.
He exhibited many miraculous signs in the g Yu bun community, such as curing
leprosy patients just by looking at them, forcing back attackers and floods, taming
wild carnivorous animals so that he could use them for transportation, igniting
himself, subduing wickedness, being able to cross the lake Dwang ra riding on a
drum and being able to build a crystal stupa in a river.
After having meditated for attaining perfection, he vanished just like the light of
a rainbow. After that, history tells us, many great masters appeared one after another.
Although the monastery sometimes experienced periods without strong leadership,
there were other times when it had several holy ones who maintained universalism
and remained meditating. Among them was m Tshungs med rNam dag tshul khrims,
who came to the monastery around 1687. He promoted the development of the
102



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
monastic community and it continued to grow through the time of his disciples,
including Tshul khrims Thun grub, up until the time of the fourth master. After that
the monastery was suppressed, but was taken care of and rehabilitated by skyid
gsum bla brang, who was the benefactor of the master gYung drung Ihartse.
In short, this monastic community was one that was outstandingly blessed,
to which many excellent masters came at every stage of the early development of
Bonpo teachings, and where many holy ones of Zhang zhung died, passing into the
rainbow light.
The monastery possessed a number of important religious objects, some of
which were later moved to other places: for example, Sad ne ga'u's conch was taken
to Thob rgyal sMan ri Monastery (No.1).
In the 1980s the monastery was reconstructed under the responsibility of the
reincarnation bs Tan 'dzin dbang grags. At present the monastery has one lama and
twenty-two monks.
(18) Phyug tsho Monastery
Travelling about forty kilometres straight south from Giya rgod xiang, we
arrive in rTa sgo xiang. Turning right at the top of a small mountain pass, and
travelling another fifty kilometres, we reach Phyug tsho Monastery. Since the sacred
sites of the snow mountain rTa sgo, the lake Dwang ra g-yu mtsho and the mountain
called dGe bsnyen are visible from the top of the pass, love and respect arise in
people's minds, which may inspire them to prostrate themselves with all their faith,
to perform the bsang ceremony as an offering and to raise ritual flags. Many of them,
moreover, pile up as many stones as their own age to make a cair.
Like Gangs Ti se, rMa chen sPom ra, Yar lha Sham po, gNyan chen Thang Iha
and spurgyal, the sacred snow mountain rTa sgo is an important pilgrimage site for
both Bonpo and Buddhists.
The lake Dwang ra g-yu mtsho, as one of the three greatest pilgrimage sites, is a
"soul lake" (bla mtsho). On its shore is a two-metre-high phallus made of dried mud,
in accordance with the ancient custom in token of worship of the Bonpo protective
deities. The term dwang ra is a Zhang zhung word meaning lake (misho).
A number of devotees from Nag tshang Nyi ma rdzong, mNga' ris mTsho chen
rdzong and other regions have infinite belief in the sacred blue lake and the snow
mountain. There are always many pilgrims circumambulating the mountain, but on
the 15th day of the fourth Tibetan month in particular, a huge number of lay devotees
and clergy come to accumulate merit through performing the circumambulation
because it is the great pilgrimage day (ribskor che mo). Some of them repeatedly
prostrate themselves and circumambulate the mountain.
The road between the above-mentioned pass and Phyug tsho Monastery is not
very good, but it is nice that wild asses, rock goats, cranes and many other wild
103



animals can be seen on the fields stretching out on both sides.
Phyug tsho Monastery is situated on the hill beside the lake Dwang ra g-yu
mtsho. One can see at a glance that among the monasteries of Eternal Bon it is
particularly distinguished.
This monastery was built around 1849 by g Yo lag sgom chen, a disciple of
sNang ston Zla ba rgyal mtshan. After being founded, it was taken care of by Khyung
ser sMon lam bstan pa, the lama of good practice, who had prodigious knowledge.
Thereafter followed the two lamas, the famous Khyung dkar bsTan pa rgyal mtshan,
who had the qualities of wisdom, compassion and power, and his attendant, the Sa
ge gYung drung ye shes. During their time, Bonpo teachings were kept, defended
and spread so well that the monastery flourished greatly.
Later, when the dge bshes of g Yung drung gling (No.2), g Yung drung bstan
pa'i rgyal mtshan from Shar khog in Amdo, became the abbot of this monastery, he
renovated it and collected many religious objects.
Then the dge bshes Khyung dkar bsTan pa lhun grub followed him as abbot. He
arranged for the future supervisor and abbot of this monastery to be sent from gYung
drung gling and that their principal practice should be based on the mKa' 'gro gsang
gcod.
At present, Phyug tsho Monastery has a number of buildings: the assembly
hall, a temple, Ka' 'gyur khang, protector's temple, monks' quarters and others. As
for the religious objects, there is a statue of sTon pa gShen rab and many kinds of
scriptures, including the bKa''gyur and Ka'brten. Of particular note are the knotted
knife and the knotted needle which are believed to be examples of proof of the
spiritual accomplishment of the masters. There are also a great many medicine-pots,
because the bum sgrub ritual has customarily been performed in this monastery,
In the protector's temple there are only the images of the Bonpo protective
deities. They look very fearsome.
At present, there are fifty monks and one lama in the monastery. Some of the
regular religious services are synchronized, for the most part, with those of g Yung
drung gling.
Now, retracing our way southward from the lakeshore of Dwang ra g-yu
mtsho to the above-mentioned mountain pass, and travelling several kilometres
south-eastward, we reach the river rTa sgo gtsang po. Ta sgo Ser zhig Monastery
is situated on the west bank of the river. Although it is only a little more than ten
kilometres from the xiang to the monastery, the summer flooding period makes it
very difficult for a car to cross the river.
(19) Ser zhig Monastery
From the description written by the supreme master who belonged to the
celebrated eighteen Zhig families, it appears that rTa sgo Ser zhig Monastery was
104



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
contemporaneous with sMan ri (No.1). It is therefore apparent that the monastery
was named Ser zhig after the family name of the lama who founded the monastery
in 1405. Ser zhig Monastery is the biggest one in the Nag tshang Dwang ra g-yu
mtsho area. Because of this, the Fifth Dalai Lama recognized it as a monastery of
the government and permitted it to have a certain number of the local people as its
retainers. The monastery is also called Se zhig skor Ide, since it is one of the seven
Nag tshang sger tsho.
The monastery consisted of a two-storey temple, the bla brang and monks'
quarters. There were many religious objects and books. Besides these, there were
religious objects transferred from Nyi lung gram, the seat of 'Dzi bon dBang gi
rgyal mtshan, when it was destroyed. However, invaded by the barbarous Mongolian
forces of Jungar, Ser zhig Monastery was turned into a military camp, and the temple
and monks' quarters were soon destroyed.
After that, a number of people launched themselves into its reconstruction, as
well as maintaining the doctrine. They included the one called Zhang zhung Lama, a
descendant of Guru lama, a lama of the Zhu family from 'Jed spang lung, a lama of
the Shel zhig family and others.
The main religious objects of the monastery were as follows: a black square
stone called A ma sa gsum with the three white letters A, Ma and Sa on it; a small
conch made of a devotee's teeth; a tooth of the ston pa gShen rab's horse with a
self-risen letter A on it; a Garuda's claw as big as a yak's horn, and a self-grown
figure of Zhi ba kun du bzang po within a crystal stupa.
Besides these, the monastery had a small drum, which is said to be a present
given to a Ser zhig lama by the local deity gDong dmar lha btsan of rTa sgo.
Among the patrons of the monastery it used to be the custom for patrons to appeal
to the abbot to let one of them beat the drum when the ritual Ma tri bum sgrub was
performed, for it was said that if one could beat the drum three time, he might get rid
of all the bad luck or misfortune of the whole year, and his wish might be fulfilled.
The patron was expected to offer five silver tam kar and a ceremonial scarf for each
beat. All the people in the neighbourhood, lay and clergy, both Buddhists and Bonpo,
showed boundless respect for this drum. At mass meetings, three beats of the drum
by the abbot preceded the chanting; only then was the prayer conductor to begin
leading the chorus.
In the protector's temple was a mask of the deity A bse, called Nga 'dra ma.
This designation was derived from the words spoken by the deity to the mask maker,
"this mask looks like me” (nga 'dra), which turned the mask into an object of great
rarity.
It is said that there were many old, important religious objects in the monastery,
such as the skull of sTon pa gShen rab with a self-produced letter A on it, his teeth
with a self-produced Gu ru on them, a statue of sTon pa with a self-produced mantra
105



Om ma ti ma ye sa le 'du on the upper right part of it, and armour that belonged to
sTon pa (said to have been taken to Xian in China).
The teaching and practice of this monastery have actually experienced rise and
fall in every stage of its history. The recent significant figures of this monastery are
as follows: Grags dbang Rinpoche of the Zhu family: sTag la dbang rgyal of the Zhu
family; the lama called Zhang zhung mkhan po; 'Og tshom dkar po; and the young
Shel zhig. The early ones are said to be in the 'Phrang lugs lineage of Nag tshang.
The monastery is administered by a lama, a prayer conductor, a dge bskos, a
treasurer and an assistant. Besides them, two monks are charged, in turn, with the
detailed tasks of religious activities, such as the accounts of Ma tri bum sgrub, and
so on.
Practice of Rituals and Religious Services
Rituals are practised in the manner of the so-called sTod Nag tshang 'phrang
tradition, prominent among other old traditions of Zhu. The way of chanting the
ritual text of the deity Khro bo is considered special and the text is said to have
been composed when the masters had visions of the deity. The same manner is said
to have been adopted by the other monasteries of the region, including 'Om bu
Monastery (No.17).
1. In the 3rd Tibetan month the following religious activities take place:
Preparations, which take five days, are made for the great bum sgrub ritual
based on the Ma tri rin chen sgrol ma; the great bum sgrub ritual is thereafter
performed for fifteen days. Religious dances are performed inside and
outside the monastery, one day for each, and another two days are spent
giving initiation.
In the course of the bum sgrub ritual, lamas and monks from the monasteries
of Phyug tsho, g Yu bun and 'Om bu, besides the permanent resident monks of Ser
zhig itself, are allowed into the monastery, and so are any others, including hermits
and pilgrims, who know how to chant the Ma tri mantra. More than 150 people may
enjoy a share of the offerings at times of great mass meetings.
2. In the 12th month the dgu gtor rite of Phur pa is performed. Initiations are
given at the end of the month.
Besides the above-mentioned activities, several other small-scale services are
performed throughout the year.
There are a number of sacred sites surrounding Ser zhig Monastery: to the
south-west lies the rTa sgo mountain range. At a good distance from the monastery,
towards the range, at the foot of a hill, is a marvelous meditation cave called Shod
tram phug pa. It was the abode of the master dMu Shod tram chen po, who was in
the exalted 'ja'lus lineage of Zhang zhung oral tradition. Near the cave is a spring
filled with limpid water that is said to cleanse sins.
106



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
At quite some distance up towards the rTa sgo mountain range, there is another
meditation cave called rTa sgo rDzu "phrul phug (the Miraculous Cave of rTa sgo); it
is about the size of a two-pillared room and is shielded in the four cardinal directions
by big rocks and overhead by a heap of big stones. It is also called rTa sgo gDong
dmar lha btsan gyi phug pa, in which resided the yogi Nam mkha' blo Idan, one
of the three chief masters of gShen Nyi ma rgyal mtshan. There is a limpid spring
beside the cave,
Further up, at the top of the hill, is a lake called Nag mer mtsho, edged with
piles of stones. It is a blessed holy lake with two different aspects: the external,
which looks like the right eye of Dwang ra; and the internal, like the eye of mka'
'gro skye ma 'od mtsho. Innumerable Buddhists and Bonpo, both lay and clergy,
visit the lake to circumambulate it or to pay respect to it. It is believed that every
pilgrimage site brings many blessings, especially in Tiger years.
Climbing up into the mountain range, at a good distance from the hilltop,
midway up the slope of the ice-capped mountain Ngo dmar lha btsan, there is an area
where heaps of the btsag (a kind of mineral used for medical purposes) can be found
around the edge of the snow. It is actually the spot where the divine bisag of rTa sgo
can be obtained.
Another source of btsag, according to some people, is in the mountains to the
east of the rTa sgo gtsang po waterfall, which can be reached via the route in front
of Ser zhig Monastery. Many people believe it to be the divine btsag of Ta sgo,
because the mountain rTa sgo casts a shadow over the site.
Formerly there were more than twenty monks in Ser zhig Monastery. At present
there are fifteen monks and one lama. Many Bonpo, laity and clergy, come to make
pilgrimages.
From Ser zhig Monastery back to Nyi ma rdzong is about 180 kilometres, and it
takes about six hours by car. The distance from there to dPal mgon rdzong generally
requires stopping for a night, but the direct way to Nag chu may be chosen as an
alternative.
From the town of Nag chu, driving seventy kilometres eastward on the Nag
chu-Chab mdo highway, one arrives at 'Bri lung xiang. Turning south-eastward and
driving another seventy kilometres, one reaches 'Bri ru rdzong. Although the road is
good between the highway and the rdzong, two mountain passes must be crossed.
of the rdzong within Nag chu region, this is one with relatively good local
characteristics.
107



Township Seat
Administrative Village
Monastery
County Border
-
River
Road
---- Footpath
1/3,530.000
Nyima County
SGer-rtse County
"Ur-stod
Nji-ma
Om b
io-angling
Shan-rtsa County
Kyung-tshang/
La stod
Gro-nyin
.....
nyug-sh
Gya-sgog
m'Tsho-chen County
Ngam-ring County
bZhad-mthong-smon County
108



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
(18) Phyug tsho Monastery, Plate 1
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)
(18) Phyug tsho Monastery. Plato 2 A phallic symbol on the Dwang ra gyu mtsho Lake's shore, near the
monastery
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)
109



'Bri ru rdzong
"Bri ru rdzong lies in the eastern part of Nag chu region. It has an area of 11,456
square kilometres, out of which 3,300 mu is farmland, 30,000 mu forest, and 11,566
mu pastureland. The population is about 39,000. The average altitude is no more
than 4,000 metres. At present, it is an area of semi-nomadic people with eleven xiang
and 176 village committees.
In ancient times when Tibet was divided into twelve small kingdoms, 'Bri ru
was under the jurisdiction of one of them, Sum pa. A battle for the unification of
Tibet broke out in the time of gNam ri slon btsan, and thereafter, during the time of
Srong btsan sgam po in the 7th century, Sum pa was absorbed into Tibet and was
formed into one of the four Ru of Tibet. At that time, 'Bri ru was still under the
jurisdiction of Sum pa.
In 1732, 'Bri ru came under direct control of the Manchu officials posted in
Tibet (am ban).
The revolution having taken place in China in 1911, the government of Tibet
took 'Bri ru back under its rule. In 1941, the Tibetan government abolished the
governor-general of Hor (Hor sPyi khyab), and established six rdzong there. 'Bri ru
rdzong was one of the six. At the end of September in 1951, the people's commune
of Bri ru rdzong was established.
The territory governed by the rdzong is very rich in mineral resources and
carnivorous and herbivorous animals. It is convenient for communication and is
blessed with natural beauty.
In "Bri ru rdzong, at present, there are nineteen Buddhist monasteries, including
Orgyan chos gling in Chags ri, and six Bonpo monasteries, including gSa'mda bon
dgon. "Bri ru rdzong has more monastic communities than any other rdzong in Nag
chu region.
(20) Sen tsha Monastery
The monastery's full name is Sen tsha dgon rNam rgyal kun grags gling,
Travelling sixty-four kilometres southward from 'Bri ru rdzong and crossing two
mountain passes, one reaches Sen tsha village in g Yang shod xiang, which lies
halfway up the mountain on the north side of the river rGyal chu.
In its early years, Sen tsha Monastery was situated in the village of Sen tsha
itself, but around 1440, kun dga' dbang Idan of the Bru family, who was a disciple
of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan, regarding the recess at the foot of Byug
ri phyug mo as auspicious, built a temple there. It is said that there were many
auspicious signs when it was built.
This establishment became a monastery, which had many buildings and blessed
religious objects, as well as many lay priests. Many lay priests of g Yang shod Mar
thang later moved, one after another, into the vicinity of the temple. This caused
110



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
not only a blurring in the distinction between clergy and laity, but also a serious
hindrance to the development of the monastery.
In 1918, when the great abbot of sMan ri (No.1), sku 'dun Phun tshogs blo
gros, came to Gyal shod, he decided to transfer the monastery in accordance with
the plan made by the lord of Sen tsha, bSod nams lha rgyal, and others. However,
there was slight internal discord at that decision. Therefore, in order to avoid the
merging of monks and lay priests, a monastery called Phun tshogs glang chen 'gying
rispo ra dgon Nam rgyal kun grags gling was established.
The monastery's religious objects at that time included the following: a statue
of sTon pa gShen rab within which was a relic of his body as big as a skylark egg,
the reliquary stupa of Khyung btsun bSam gtan nyi ma, several bigger clay statues,
scriptures written in gold on a black ground, a treasure-trove consisting of such items
as a helmet and a coat of mail, and many scriptures, including a complete set of the
bka' gyur and Ka'brien.
The youngest son of bSod nams lha rgyal, the chief of Sen tsha, was ordained
in the presence of the abbot, Ku 'dun Phun tshogs blo gros, and was given the name
Tshul khrims rgya mtsho. He was esteemed as the head of the institution, which
then became a veritable monastery. In order to collect donations, Tshul khrims
rgyal mtsho travelled to the nomad area of Hor, where there was a good number of
contributors, which was useful for the subsistence of the monastery. His paternal
lineage was in the Zhu family, which had branched from the family of the rDzum
chief. He kept a close patron-priest relationship with Hor, hence the alternate name
of the monastery, Sen tsha Zhu tshang gYang shod dgon.
Religious services and practice of rituals
The rituals mainly practised in this monastery were divided into two sections:
rituals based on the rNam rgyal and Klong rgyas of the non-Tantric section and the
dBal gsas zhi drag of the Tantric section and the propitiatory texts for the religious
Bon protectors, especially the deity Brag btsan A bse.
The main annual religious services were the chanting of the ritual cycles of
Khro bo, dal gsas and Phur pa. Besides these, the ritual Ma tri bum sgrub was
practised, religious dances were performed, initiations were given and other services
were performed
The organization of the monastery's personnel was just like every other
monastery: dbu bla (head), dge bskos, dbu mdzad, and las sne (monk officials).
After the first transfer, the monastery was in a state of pure asceticism; morality
was tightly maintained, just like a knot of silk. However, it later gradually declined
and the monks and lay priests began to live together. As a monastery, it remained so
only in name.
It was Thugs dga' of rMe'u who took responsibility for the reorganization of



the monastery. The temple, assembly hall, monks' quarters and other buildings were
restored to their former condition. A collection of religious objects of body, speech
and mind was also completed.
At present, this monastery has six lamas, including Thugs dga', and fifty
monks. The annual activities and religious dances have been revived. Moreover,
the monastery has been undergoing restoration and expansion under the guidance
of Thugs dga', who has broad knowledge of Sutra, Tantra and the Mind class of the
Bon doctrines, as well as magnificent conduct.
(21) dGa'ri Monastery
Sen tsha da' ri Monastery is also in gYang shod xiang, but located on the
other side of the river Gyal chu. In 1697 or so, mKhas btsun bSam gtan nyi ma
established the site as a place for meditation practice. There he meditated upon the
tutelary deity dBal phur nag po and finally attained realization.
The monastery is regarded as the sacred site of Phur pa. It is said that there
are clear traces of a tiger, a snow lion, a Garuda and a dragon having landed on
the cardinal points of this monastery. To the north is the mountain sBas yul gtsang
ma dga' ba'i ri. The fact that the mountain is said to have a hidden place (sbas yul)
where Tshe dbang rig 'dzin attained realization explains why it is called Ga'ri (the
Mountain of Joy).
bsTan pa'i nyi ma, who was a disciple of the great saint bsTan 'dzin rin chen
bde chen snying po, practised meditation in this place and attained realization. He
built a temple and collected religious objects, so that the hermitage was finally
transformed into a monastery. He attracted many disciples by giving teachings based
on the dMar khrid dug Inga rang grol, which is a mental-treasure (dgongs gter) of
Grub dbang bs Tan 'dzin rin chen. He lived a long life.
After that, in the second half of the Fifteenth Rab byung, skal bzang rgya
mtsho, a lama of the rMe'u lineage, was recognized as the reincarnation of bstan
pa'i nyi ma. He looked after the interests of Ga'ri Monastery. He took an oath to be
a monk in the presence of Phun tshogs blo gros, the great abbot of sMan ri (No.1),
and rendered great services during his whole life.
The main religious objects of this monastery are a reliquary stupa of mKhas
btsun bSam gtan nyi ma, a gilt-bronze statue of rNam par rgyal ba as high as the
ceiling, a statue of rGyal ba mNyam med pa made of a mixture of medicine and clay,
and statues of Gyal yum Byams ma and Dran pa nam mkha' with his twin sons.
There is also a great collection of scriptures written in gold and silver.
The principal deity of this monastery is dBal phur nag po, but offerings are
constantly made to Khro bo, dBal gsas and sTag la, as well as the performance of the
ceremony of thousand offerings to rNam rgyal.
In 1940, bs Tan pa'i nyi ma, the reincarnated lama of Srid rgyal dgon chen
112



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
(No.88) of Bon ri in kong po, after paying a visit to his native land, stayed at dGa'ri
Monastery in solitary meditation. At that time there were seventeen monks there. At
present, his descendant, lama Tshul khrims blo gros, and fifteen other monks reside
there.
Travelling about six kilometres eastward from g Yang shod xiang up to Ban
dkar xiang and another five kilometres eastward from there leads one to Klu mkhar
Monastery.
(22) Klu mkhar Monastery
This is a "Tantric monastery" (sngags dgon) built in 1460 by g Yung drung
khri 'od of the Zhu lineage. When the brutal military forces of the Mongolian
Jungar invaded the Northern Plateau (Byang thang), this monastery was completely
destroyed.
Later, reconstructed by a descendant of the Zhu lineage, the monastery was
protected by a branch of the Zhu family based in gDong rdzong and became known
as Klu mkhar dgon. Its main religious object is a sacred statue of sTag la, celebrated
as the one bestowed by Gyal ba mNyam med pa. The monastery is called Klu
mkhar (the fort of Klu) after a small lake that only appears in summer and is situated
behind the monastery. The lake is believed to have been a residence of a water spirit
Thereafter, the monastery was regarded as having been managed by the lama
sPu la, but in fact it was taken care by Shes Iding. Lama sPu la originally came
from Sog rdzong and later moved into sBra chen rdzong. He was in the line of
Khyung nag, one of the thirteen families of Khyung, which was recognized as such
by the Tibetan government. Historical documents do not state clearly how long he
maintained Klu mkhar Monastery.
The lamas who appeared after him were Rig 'dzin g-yang skyob, g Yung drung
bstan 'dzin and bSod nams chos rgyal. Then bSod nams ye shes supported the
reconstruction of the monastery, which involved a great deal of expense, with his
own property.
The principal image of this monastery, the gilt-bronze statue of sTon pa gShen
rab as high as the ceiling, was said to have a bit of body heat in its breast, and so was
called the Golden Statue of Baby Warmth (gSer sku Byis drod ma). This statue had
been brought from somewhere else. Besides this, there were several other religious
objects, including the statue of gShen lha 'od dkar made of "red gold" (dzi gim) and
a statue of sTag la.
The religious services performed in the monastery were the Zhi khro, rNam
rgyal stong mchod and others. Formerly there were thirty-one resident monks there,
At present, Klu mkhar Monastery is surrounded by homes of common people.
In the monastery there are several thangka and small implements used for offerings



Upstairs is a small altar room. There is one lama and thirty monks, most of whom
are said to be lay priests.
On either side of the outer gate there is a stone pillar on which the term rnam
gzhag is carved in dbu can letters. There is also a marvellously colourful bluish
stone called Shar Gya stag khra bo. It is heart-breaking to see the poor condition of
this monastery.
From Klu mkhar Monastery, travelling five kilometres eastward on the highway,
dNgul kho village can be seen lying half way up the mountainside on the northern
side of the road, Ngul kho Monastery is near this village, on the west side.
(23) dNgul kho Monastery
dNgul kho dgon g Yung drung dar rgyas gling was built by Kyu ra od zer in
1240 in the present-day dNgul kho village. It is a traditional "Tantric monastery",
small but influential, and has been in a state of stability with no serious ups and
downs for a long time. History does not tell clearly the individual names of every
lama who has cared for and protected the monastery so far, but it is said that
descendants in the Ko bo lineage, one of the three descent groups of the region
called Ko bo, Rag shi and Shel sku took care of the monastery and rendered great
service in keeping, defending and spreading the doctrine of Eternal Bon.
Later, in the Fifteenth Rab byung, Me ston Nyi ma rgyal mtshan, a hermit from
Brag dmar ri 'dun in Khyung po, and sTag zhig Rin chen dbang Idan, a disciple of
Grub chen sMon lam rgyal mtshan, on their way to kong po, established a close
patron-priest relationship with the villagers and monks of Gyal shod. Acceding to
the wishes expressed by the Shel sku villagers, these hermits decided to take care of
the dNgul kho Monastery,
Several years after that, sTag zhig Rin dbang, accompanied by some others,
arrived in Gyal shod and became the head of this monastery
At the end of the Fifteenth Rab byung, dNgul kho Monastery was moved from
dNgul kho village to the western outskirts, midway up the slope of the mountain. It
now takes about twenty minutes to go up to the monastery by car.
When the monastery was built, Ban dkar stag phu chos rje Ngag dbang bstan
'dzing rgya mtsho, who was of the dGe lugs pa school, gave a huge amount of tea,
grain and the like, by way of offering congratulations for the completion of the
monastery.
Having fully completed dNgul kho Monastery with excellent buildings and
religious objects, sTag zhig Rin dbang summoned all the monks of the Eternal Bon
monasteries and hermitages in Gyal shod district to his monastery and performed
the "medicine rite" (sman sgrub) based on the Khro bo 'od zer 'khyil ba. This was
the first time such a rite, on such a grand scale, was performed in the region. He
bestowed upon the participants all the teachings they wished for. Not only that,
114



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
according to the manner of each monastic community, he continually arranged
plentiful offerings and brought back the lost rules of the regular services of dNgul
kho Monastery and recruited more monks and lay practitioners than before.
Since this lama himself relied upon those laymen who had taken some vows,
he obtained the real nature of power of wisdom and compassion by means of Tantric
practices. He is said to have been a man of outstanding virtue and deeds, and who
had rediscovered the Tshogs bdag rol pa and the statue of Tshe dbang rig 'dzin
among the rocks of Sen ge gnam rdzong in gSa'phu.
According to the description in his biography, he was born in 1883. A special
ordinance was given to the monastery by His Holiness the Thirteenth Dalai Lama,
Thub bstan rgya mtsho.
During the time of sTag zhig Rin dbang, dNgul kho dar rgyal gling made
progress in deserving its name. Later, around the 1920s, both the lama and his
disciple died, one after the other.
Since this monastery was a mixture of old and new Bonpo tradition, the regular
prayer services and rituals are also practised accordingly,
Main religious objects
The monastery's religious objects, which were in perfect condition, included
the following: a bronze statue of Zhi ba kun bzang a skor; one of Tshe dbang rig
'dzin, rediscovered in gSa' phu by sTag gzhi Rin dbang: a conch of enlightenment
that belonged to sTag gzhi Rin dbang; and the three relics of sTag gzhi Tshul khrims
called sha ri ram, meri ram and chu ri ram, which came out of his brain. However,
after the death of sTag gzhi Rin dbang, the monastery declined, due to many
problems.
This monastery had a slob dpon, a dbu mdzad, a dge bskos and a spyi phyag.
The latter took all the responsibilities for supervising the monastic work. There used
to be about forty monks.
This monastery was recently restored to some degree by A bu bSam med
and others, and has about thirty monks at present. It is situated in a beautiful
environment, and near it there is a sacred graveyard.
At present, dNgul kho Monastery is, on the whole, in a state of more serious
decline than ever before.
From dNgul kho Monastery, travelling about six kilometres eastward along
the river rGyal chu, we come to Ban dkar xiang, in which Do rting Monastery is
located. The monastery is situated on a hill to the south-west of the river Gyal chu.
It takes about twenty minutes on foot to reach the top of the hill.
(24) rDo rting Monastery
Do rting dgon Ngo mtshar Phun tshogs gling was founded in 1420 by Kun



dga' dbang ldan of the Bru family. It stands in the middle of Bon lung skya mo in
rGyal shod, as if protected all around by the Eight Sisters of Mo nam smug po. It is
a pleasant place, with a hill resembling a Garuda stretching its wings at the back of
the monastery, an eight-spoked wheel in the sky, double-petalled lotus flowers on the
ground, and five big juniper trees, symbol of the "five families" (rigs Inga), at the
front.
When Bru ston m Tshungs med bsod blo, the heart-emanation of sTong rgyung
and one of the eighteen gYas ru teachers who were greatly famed in the latter stage
of Bonpo development, travelled all over mDo khams, he paid a visit to this place
and gave a blessing. Before the establishment of this monastery, it is said that there
was already the residence (bla brang) of the Shel sku family in Dorting.
Some call this monastery Do gter because Bru Kun dga' dbang ldan built it at
the very site where Shel sku Khro bo rgyal mtshan rediscovered a nine-edged black
iron vajra (rdo rje) from a mine (gter). Kun dga' dbang Idan not only established Do
rting Monastery but also taught cosmogony and monastic discipline according to the
Bru tradition and, moreover, developed the practice of rituals. Do rting became a
veritable monastery preserving the pure tradition of Gyal ba sMan ri ba and came to
be reputed as sMan ri bar ma.
There were two residences (bla brang) in Do rting Monastery called Bru
tshang and Shel tshang. A big juniper tree planted by Bru Kun dga' dbang Idan
himself, in order block the view of inauspicious geomantic signs, is still seen to the
north of the Bru tshang residence
At the time of Kun dga' dbang ldan, there were about one hundred monks at
this monastery. They performed the following religious services every three years:
the great medicine-completion ceremony of Khro bo 'od zer 'khyil ba, the great
initiation of Gu ya and the mdos ritual based on the mKha'klong gsang ba'i mdos
chen. These were normally performed just like the regular services of Gyal ba sMan
ri ba.
The lamas of the Bru and Shel sku residences took turns, for three years each,
to look after the monastery. At the time, the monastic buildings were extraordinarily
beautiful. At the centre of the monastery were nine long pillars, on which vases
were carved. They were topped by a carved Garuda and supported by a base that
was a carved turtle. The roof rafters, fashioned into a pa tra, the family crest, were
supported around the edge by eight pillars. There were four large mandalas drawn
on the ceiling (facing down). They were of the mDo g-yung drung klong rgyas, the
Zhi ba g-yung drung yongs rdzogs, the Khro bo dbang chen and the Mu tra tha 'i
dkyil "khor. In the verandah outside were carvings of reticulated swastikas,
With respect to the Shel sku residence of this monastery, there has been a steady
succession of lamas:
1. Shel bla sMon lam bkra shis
116



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
2. Nam mkha''od zer
3. g Yung drung rgyal mtshan
4. Nam mkha'rgyal mtshan
5.TNam rgyal tshul khrims
6. Grags pa mam rgyal
These were all in the line of descent from gNam gsas rgyal po of the Shel zhig
family, a branch of the line of sTang chen dMu tsha gyer med. Then followed the
Shel lamas invited from the Shel zhig family in the north:
1. Gyal mchog nyi ma
2. Nam mkha' rgyal po
3. Nam mkha' bsod rgyal
4. IHun grub dbang rgyal
5. Gyal ba tshul khrims
These lamas first began by making preparations to set up their residence in the
monastery. Then, in collaboration with the Bru family, they established rDo rting
Monastery. For a period of time, care for the monastery was shared with the lama
Be 'o, who had come to stay here; later on, its religious teachers were just Shel sku
lamas.
Of the above-mentioned Shel lamas, some were monks, and some were
text-discoverers, that is to say, married. Not only that, they recreated one of their
unique traditions called bDud rtsi khi khar: the practice of religious festivals wherein
the way the ritual was carried out was inspired by the early masters, both men and
women. Shel bla g Yung drung rgyal mtshan rediscovered a crystal image called
Dri med shel sku at the Shel sbug of Kong po Bon ri, the holy mountain. bТsan rje
dmar po, the local deity of Bon ri, is also one of the protective deities of rDo rting
Monastery. Some of the Shel zhig lamas were thus referred to by the abbreviation
Shel bla.
The religious object of major importance in Do rting Monastery at that time
was the statue of Khro bo gtso mchog as high as the ceiling. It had been rediscovered
by Shel bla Khro bo rgyal mtshan from the source of the river Khro tshang, which
runs through the side of the monastery. In the temple there was said to be a golden
statue and many other religious objects.
As for scriptures, there were sixteen volumes of the Khams chen, written in
gold, called 'Dzam gling rgyan (the ornament of the World). It was also called gSer
chos zho 'bru skar tsheg. The name denotes that every single letter (vig 'brui) of the
golden text (gser chos) is written with as much gold as one zho of gold, and every
tsheg with one skar ma of gold. The gold was provided by the protector of water,
the great dge bsnyen of Yag zam kha, who offered a pair of goldfish in honour of
the Shel sku lama and the monastery. According to oral tradition, the lamas and the
monks, considering the possibility that the powerful local lord might come to seize



the gold if the news leaked out of the monastery, smelted it secretly so that they
could use it to write the Khams chen with it.
Later, the monastery experienced a change that was considerable. As is quite
a common course of events in the human world, the Shel sku family broke up into
several factions. Even the Shel sku bla brang in the monastery itself was spilt up,
and the family finally abandoned the monastery altogether. The members of the
family became common people like any other. The Bru tshang bla brang also became
helpless with no protector.
At about the same time, Be 'o Lama, who had come from the north, took up
permanent residence in rDo rting Monastery. At first he tried to help the monastery,
but this elicited much criticism internally and as a result the monastery suffered
further. Caught by the tide and destiny, the interests of the monastery and the deeds
of the lamas were all reduced to a state of withered winter flowers.
Do rting Monastery, in spite of its previous reputation as sMan ri Bar ma,
eventually declined into a lay establishment. Not only that, the religious objects
that were easily carried became scattered everywhere. The two lamas, IHa thog and
IHa mgon, went elsewhere, and the monastery itself was threatened with complete
destruction.
At that time, the community leaders of the four tents, having learned a lesson
from the past, launched a reconstruction of rDo rting Monastery in order to avoid
its total decline. They took on responsibility for the work and took the decisions
that the two Shel sku lamas who had fled to Glas rgyud should, by turn, take care
of the monastery as religious teacher and that the number of lay practitioners (ser
khyim) should not be reduced to less than forty. They distributed the monastic funds
and other properties to all the villagers so that the villagers would be able to help
maintain the yearly expenses of the establishment.
Then they restored the temple, and made continuous efforts to bring back the
scattered religious objects and resolve other issues. Having succeeded in regaining
the image of Khro bo gTso mchog, they relocated the dBu rtse temple and made a
new clay image. The large and small conchs, which were the ritual instruments of
Sad ne ga'u, and those of Ti ti mi slag can, were well kept in the monastery.
The principal religious services practised at the monastery were based on texts
such as the Bon skyong sgrup pa, the mKha'klong gsang mdos, the Ngo mtshar
rgyas pa and the Zhi khro Formerly, rDo rting Monastery was one of the thirteen
monastic communities of Gyal ston Iding dgu.
The monastery now exists in its restored condition and contains an assembly
hall, a temple and several religious objects. At present there are twenty-seven monks
and one lama.
118



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
(25) gSa'mda' bon Monastery
gSa'mda' bon dgon Mi g-yo bsam gtan gling is situated to the south of the river
rGyal chu. Although a road has been built from gYang shod xiang to the monastery,
there is no bridge over the river Gyal chu capable of carrying traffic. So a ride of
about five hours on horseback is required.
The monastery was founded by Zhu btsun g Yung drung khri 'od in 1465. Gyal
shod, the seat of the monastery, is one of the so-called Four Rong (gorge) and Eight
or Eighteen Shod (lowland) that a number of holy men have visited. In ancient
times, the district was called Sum pa'i stong bu chung and was part of sGo pa, one
of the three regions of Zhang zhung known as Go, Phug and Bar. During the reign
of Srong bsan sgam po, Tibet was divided into four ru and the core of the third ru,
called Gyal shod sTag pa tshal, corresponds to the present-day Gyal shod.
The derivation of the monastery's name is as follows: This monastery was built
on a protruding from the hill site called gSa' mda' (gSa' lung mda'), which was
counted as one of the Thirteen Treasures (Rin chen bcu gsum) in a region where
various flowers of surpassing beauty bloom, such that the place was called rTsi thog
steng (Plateau of fruits and flowers). The monastery was commonly called gSa'mda
bon dgon, which was a combination of the altemate name of the site and the name of
the religious tradition, while its real name is Mi g-yo bsam gtan gling.
The area has a mountain called Phu ru lho yi 'dzam bu klu ri and a lake, gSa'
phu mgon lha dkar po. These are regarded as two of the Thirteen Treasures of gSa'
(snow leopard). Around them, to the right lies rGod kyi dar rgyas bcu gsum, to the
left lies La gong gi drag rtsal bcu gsum, and in front, Mo nam smyug mo mched
brgyad, just like servants surrounding their king. They are places of outstanding
sacredness where teacher Kun tu bzang po meditated and bestowed blessings. In
the caves of these places Dran pa nam mkha and his twin sons are believed to
have concealed texts containing profound teachings and had also left marks of their
spiritual attainment.
As the site is a meeting point for travellers between China and Tibet, the name
gSa'mda bon dgon frequently appears in documents and is therefore, a well-known
place. Over the years the fortunes of the monastery have risen and fallen.
In regard to the origin of gSa'mda bon dgon, it is difficult to specify from
historical documents. According to a document, before gSa'mda' was founded, there
was another monastery called Mar khu thang established by either Ko bo Ye shes
rgyal mtshan or Khu btsun gYung drung khri 'od.
According to recent study on the origin of the Bon religion and its lamas, it was
the masters of the Zhu g-yas lineage that had established many monastic centres,
including Sogg Yung drung gling and Khra rgan nyi yu in the latter stage of Bonpo
development, when the dying embers of teaching began to rekindle all over Tibet.
The Zhu 8-yas is a powerful lineage whose forefather is Zhu g-yas Legs po, the
119



authorized proprietor of the Bon tantric and Mind class teachings, which had been
handed down from gShen chen Klu dga'. The latter was the principal one among the
one hundred text-discoverers who had opened the door to Bonpo teachings.
In 1465, Zhu btsun gYung drung khri 'od founded Mi g-yo bsam gtan gling. It
generally followed the Zhu tradition called Zhu lugs Sog zam and the rituals were
practised following the manner of Sogg Yung drung gling Monastery.
Ko bo Ye shes rgyal mtshan meditated in the gSa'bu mdzod 'chang smug mo
hermitage. During the latter half of his lifetime he went to Khyung po and founded
a monastery, and worked hard for the sake of sentient beings. The monastery was
taken care of by the adherents of Ko bo Ye shes rgyal mtshan, including Ko ston
sByin pa rgyal mtshan and Ko bo Kun bzang, who had appeared in succession. Since
these ko lamas were benevolent enough to look after the monastery, they developed
it by giving continuous teachings based on Sutra, Tantra and the Mind texts so that
the monastery developed further, making its name known everywhere. It is said that
when Ko bo Ye shes rgyal mtshan passed away, many self-grown relics appeared
(from the cremation of his body) which were worshipped as the most auspicious
objects in this monastery.
In 1718, misfortune befell Mar khu thang Monastery when the vicious
Mongolian troops of Jungar came to Gyal shod district and plotted to destroy the
monastery. The two Bonpo local leaders, IHa rje skyen ga yu and Thod pa thad
ga yu, undertook armed operations and killed some of the vicious Mongolian
soldiers, including the chief, but could not prevent the rest of the Jungar entering
the monastery. They plundered the monastery beyond all imagination, destroying it
totally. All the religious objects were instantly turned into a ball of fire. However,
one of the main religious objects, the word-uttering statue of gShen rab (sTon pa
gsung byon ma), escaped destruction, along with the two short pillars, and they were
regarded as the auspicious symbol of the monastery's restoration.
Preparations for restoration of the monastery were made. Of all the things that
were lost, they searched in particular for one of the main religious objects, called
'Phar chen dkar po Gyang grags ma (the Big White Conch of Far-flung Fame),
made of sTon pa gShen rab's teeth, which had gone missing in the chaos. It was
found on a rock at gSa'yar kha, which influenced the decision to rebuild the future
monastery there.
During the several years of hard work that was being done making preparations,
Sangs rgyas gling pa, alias Byang chub rdo rje, who upheld the tradition of the New
Bon, was travelling in the regions of the four rong, such as Kong po and the eight
shod where he made rediscoveries of texts. In 1727, he came to rTsi thog steng
and carried out the ceremony of consecration of the new location. The officials, lay
practitioners and people of the Bu rdzum tribe made him the religious teacher of
this monastery, and he bestowed upon the new monastery the name Mi g-yo gsam
120



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
gtan gling, the same as before, plus abundant funds and materials to make continual
offerings. The monastery maintained its ritual practices of the Zhu tradition, but
Sangs rgyas gling pa also introduced some of those of the New Bon.
At that time there were about sixty monks and lay practitioners in all, so some
people began to call the monastery the Sixty Monastic College of gSa' 'mda (gSa'
mda' grwa tshang drug cu).
Later, Mi 'gyur rgyal mtshan, an incarnate lama, visited Gyal shod. He resided
at kong po Bon ri and was one of the twenty-five Red Hat masters who were
regarded as the masters of Sangs rgyas gling pa's teachings.
Mi 'gyur rgyal mtshan began to have a close patron-priest relationship with the
officials and people of the Bu rdzum tribe. Formerly, when Sangs rgyas gling pa was
the head of the monastery, the officials, people and priests of Bu rdzum expressed a
strong hope that the holy man Mi 'gyur rgyal mtshan would be the proprietor of both
Gyal ri and gSa'mda' monasteries, which he accepted.
To the religious dances performed during the Ma tri bum sgrub festival of gSa'
mda' bon dgon, Mi 'gyur rgyal mtshan added some elegant styles following those
performed in Gyal ri Monastery. He gave gSa'mda' bon dgon a mask of mKha' 'gro
seng gdong ma crafted by 'Brel 'Gyur med rgyal mtshan, as an object of worship.
He worked, in particular, on reframing the written moral code of the monastery
by rectifying its defect; this was regarded as an invaluable deed for the entire
community and was indeed very beneficial to the interests of the monastery.
The reconstruction of gSa' mda bon dgon began with the building of the
twelve-pillared assembly hall. It had a porch and stairway. Then the monks' quarters
and other buildings were built, all in a good fashion.
The main religious objects of the monastery were as follows: the big conch
made of gShen rab Mi bo's teeth; the relic stupas of the successive Ko bo lamas; a
bronze statue of gShen rab; a gilt-bronze statue of mKhan chen Mu zi gsal bzang;
statues of gShen Iha 'od dkar, Khro bo gtso mchog and gShen gSangs ba 'dus pa,
all made of a mixture of medicine and clay, as well as stupas, including rNam rgyal
mchod rten. In the assembly hall were murals of the Twelve Deeds (mbzad pa bcu
gnyis) and the deities of gSas mkhar mchog Inga. At the porch were, in common
with every other monastery, the murals of the Four Great Kings (rGyal chen sde
bzhi), the wheel of existence and so forth, and, not common to all monasteries,
murals of the territorial deities of peaceful nature (yul tha), such as gSa' yi nor bu
bcu gsum and Chis kyi rin chen bcu gsum. In the tantric room upstairs were images
of principal religious protective deities of peace and wrath, and on both sides of them
stood the Six Bonpo Protectors (Bоn skyong sde drug) and Zhu btsan Grags rgyal in
a frightening aspect, as if guarding the Bonpo doctrine,
A brief history of the influential Zhu lineage, which had maintained gSa'mda'
bon dgon in Burdzum, is as follows:



Once there was the chief gYung drung bsod nams, one of the successive Bu
rdzum chiefs. It is said that originally these were offspring of the local deity. gYung
drung bsod nams had only a daughter named Rin chen Iha mo, who remained
without offspring. There were no chiefs for the community and so there was the
danger that the chieftain lineage might be ended. However, she was a person capable
of leading her community. The members of her community, both lay and clerical,
decided that they should try to look for a suitable man of a good family who would
marry her. At that time, in 1777, the g Ter ston Yung drung grags pa of the Zhu
family, who was learned and compassionate, began to have a very close relationship
with gSa'mda' bon dgon. The leaders of the monastery therefore requested him to
marry Rin chen lha mo so that he could look after the monastery.
He provided a powerful remedy for the local community and the Bonpo
doctrine. He established a close patron-priest relationship with Tshe ring rab brtan,
the king of Hor, and became the king's spiritual master.
gYung drung grags pa rediscovered hidden texts in the sacred site Brag dkar
Tha lung, situated in the vicinity of Klu phug Monastery (No.31) in Bra chen, and
recognized the place as a pilgrimage site as well as tracing the path around it. At that
time, the people of the Bu rdzum tribe, both laity and clergy, thought that since the
monastery was founded by a man of the Zhu family and its tradition belonged to this
family, it would be most appropriate if the Zhu family also now looked after it, and
they congratulated the lama. From that time on, in the Bu rdzum tribe, the lineage of
the local chief was united with that of Zhu g-yas.
Concerning the way in which this Bonpo monastery, whose inmates were a
mixture of monks and lay practitioners, was transformed into a proper monastery,
it happened as follows: When Sangs rgyas bstan'dzin dbang gi rgyal po, the
incarnation of rJe btsun Byang pa Khro tshang 'Brug lha and the twenty-fifth throne
holder of Man ri Monastery (No.1) in gTsang, where the Second Buddha mNyam
med Shes rab rgyal mtshan resided, came to the lower ryal shod, he said that if
the monastery followed the monastic tradition of sMan ri it would be a great benefit
in the future for the interests of monastery itself and living beings. Every Bonpo
devotee in the place, lay and clerical, willingly accepted the proposal. The leaders of
the region, members of the monastery and ordinary people took vows to respect the
recommendation
mGon lha, the younger son of the chief Zhu g-yas Pad ma rin chen, took
monastic vows and was given the name bskal bzang gtsug phud. The lay
practitioners in the monastery also took monastic vows. Moreover, many people
from the tribe became monks, so that the number of monks grew by nearly one
hundred. The abbot wrote the regulations of the monastery based on the Vinaya and
Sutra.
When the abbot was about to leave for sMan ri Monastery, he called at Mi
122



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
g-yo bsam gtan gling and gave an instruction saying that they should follow the Bru
tradition, in accordance with the sMan ri practice, but the Zhu tradition of the du
gsum festivals is of such magnificence that it should be maintained as before. For
this reason, the Zhu tradition of the festivals has been kept till the present day.
Later on, the above-mentioned mGon lha vacated the throne and went to live
with the family of the Sen tsha chieftain. However, he continued to do a lot of work
that was beneficial to the monastery: he had many invaluable monastic articles made
in the assembly hall, such as victorious banners decorated with various ornaments,
the phan, the phye 'phur and canopies, all made of thick Hor cloth.
bsTan pa 'brug grags became a monk in this monastery. He was one of the four
nephews of the king of Hor, Tsung chen hu Tshe dbang Iha rgyal. The latter was a
son of Zhu g-yas bSod nams dpad rgyal, the chief of Bu rdzum. However, bsTan pa
'brug grags could not do much for the monastery.
After that the local community needed another lama. The leaders of Bu rdzum,
therefore, sent a messenger with one rdo ishad of silver and many other things to
Ri zhing Monastery (No.4) in the upper Nyang in gTsang in order to invite a lama
of the Zhu family. A lama called ston pa of rТsa phu bla brang in Ri zhing, who
was learned in the tradition of srid gshen, considering the benefit to sentient beings,
accepted the invitation and came to Gyal shod. As a departing gift, the rТsa phu bla
brang gave him the so-called He la nam mkha'i 'phur mo che, which is a statue of
Phur pa rediscovered by gShen chen Klu dga'. It was made of five different precious
metals with three faces and a Garuda hovering above its head.
The lama sTon pa lived among the people of Gyal shod as if he were a simple
layman. He worked a great deal for the beings, not caring for either wealth or fame.
He had four sons. One of the middle two took monastic vows in the presence of the
abbots of the upper and lower monasteries, and received the name bsTan 'dzin gtsug
phud. He received initiations and teachings of the outer, inner, and secret so well
that the proper practice of rituals spread everywhere. As hoped by the people, priests
and officials, he became the head of gSa mda' bon dgon. He travelled often to the
nomad areas of Hor in order to collect donations. In 1916, he completely rebuilt the
monastery with new buildings, such as the temple with forty-eight long and short
pillars, the dBu rtse with its stairway, the dance hall and so forth. However, he did
not live to see the religious objects and murals completed.
After the death of bsTan 'dzin gtsug phud, bsTan pa rgya mtsho of Zhu g-yas
took over the work. Many lay and clerical devotees made donations, so that the
murals and religious objects were completed. In the dBu rtse temple were the
following: a gilt-bronze statue of Gyal ba rgya mtsho with a thousand arms and a
thousand eyes, as high as a two-storey house; a life-size gilt-bronze statue of Tshe
dbang bod yul ma; clay images of tNam par rgyal ba, sMra ba'i seng ge, Thugs rje
byams ma, mNyam med chen po, gTso mchog mkha' 'gyings and sTag la me 'bar,
123



each of which stood as high as a two-storey house, installed on fully draped thrones.
On the shelves, on both sides of the assembly hall, are said to have been a
collection of countless scriptures, including the bka''gyur and bka'brien of Eternal
Bon, the 'Bum and mDo gzer mig written in gold and the 'Bum of the three versions:
detailed, standard and compact. There were the murals of the Thousand Buddha,
Cho ga bcu gnyis, the Twelve Deeds of gShen rab Mi bo, the deities of gSas mkhar
mchog Inga and the protective deities of Bon. Around the upper structure of the
temple were murals of the lineage of the masters of monastic tradition. At the porch
were the murals of the Four Great Kings and the wheel of existence.
Upstairs, in the bsKangs gso khang, were clay images of sTag la spu gri dmar
nag and the religious protectors of Bon. On the lattice-work fence were clay images
of dBal gsas and Tshe dbang Bod yul ma. The murals were of the assembled deities
of Zhang zhung Bon skor.
Zhu g-yas bsTan pa rgya mtsho was the younger of the two sons of Pad ma
mam rgyal, a chief of Bu rdzum. He was born in 1905 and his lay name was bSod
nams grags pa. He later took monastic vows in the presence of sku 'dun Phun tshogs
blo gros of Man ri Monastery, and was given the name bs Tan pa rgya mtsho. He
received teachings in the presence of the mKhan chen Phun tshogs blo gros, the yogi
bZod pa rgyal mtshan from Khyung po and the hermit gYung drung ye shes. He
mastered the esoteric learning of Bon and became the head of gSa' mda' bon dgon,
which consequently brought great prosperity to the monastery. In the latter half of
his life he handed over all the responsibilities of teaching to his nephew Nyi zla tshe
dbang, alias bsTan pa rgyal mtshan, and practised meditation for the rest of his life
at the cave gSa phu. He passed away in 1966.
Nyi zla tshe dbang is the present head of gSa'mda' bon dgon. He was born
in the family of the chief of Bu rdzum and was the younger of the two sons of Zhu
g-yas Rin chen dbang rgyal. In 1934, he took monastic vows in the presence of
bsTan pa blo gros, the abbot of sMan ri, and was given the name bsTan pa rgyal
mtshan. He studied the precepts of Bon under the same master and bZod pa rgyal
mtshan, the yogi of Khyung po. Similarly, he received teachings from the three other
masters: Zhu g-yas gYung drung rgyal mtshan from Yung drung dpal ri in Khyung
po; Shel zhig gYung drung rnam rgyal, a personal disciple of Grub dbang Shar rdza
pa; and bs Tan pa rgya mtsho, his paternal uncle. He also studied the general culture
of Tibet, including Tibetan linguistics. He has been in charge of all aspects of the
headship of this monastery up to the present day.
Annual Religious Services and Practice of Rituals
For about fifteen days, from the 3rd day of the 1st Tibetan month, there were
ceremonies of Inga mchod and from the 16th, for three days, the smon lam festival
is celebrated. Besides these, normally after finishing daily tea, the monks assemble
124



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
to perform various rituals: the eight-day ritual based on the Gribsbyong mun sel
sgron ma, called the dPon tshang ma a dkar, the Zhi khro ritual, for over twenty
days, the seven-day ritual of Margyud; the five-day ritual of gDugs dkar; the Twelve
Rituals (Cho ga bcu gnyis), for twelve days; the recitation of the bka''gyur, and the
five-day ritual of Phur pa. On these occasions, a number of local devotees come to
make flower offerings.
In the 6th Tibetan month a summer retreat is observed for about thirty days.
Then comes the end of the month, when the dgu gtor rite called Khro bo dmar chen,
which is the short one (dgu chung), is performed.
In the 8th month there is a big festival, Ma tri bum sgrub, for twelve days. On
this occasion, religious dances that consist of thirteen different ones are performed
over two days and on another day the public initiation is given.
On the 24th day of the 10th month another dgu gior rite is performed, this time
an elaborated one (dgu chen), based on the recital of the Khro bo ngo mtshar rayas
pa.
From the 3rd day of the 12th month the ritual sTag la tshogs stong is performed,
and at the end of the month the dgu gtor rite of Tag la is performed, leading to the
New Year's general celebration.
To sum up, they assemble for rituals for more than ten months of the whole
year.
As for the organization of this monastery, it consists mainly of a dbu bla
(head), four las sne (official), dbu mdzad and dge bskos. In addition to these, there
are several senior monks from Khyung po and Ya nge thod pa in the lineage of
old Bonpo masters, who take responsibility for managing the big festivities. For
prescribed monastic activities the first four above-mentioned members should
take responsibility. The main annual ceremonies are Nag po spam chen, Tshogs
stong, INga mchod, sMon lam, Zhi khro, Ma rgyud, gDugs dkar, Phur pa, Dung
yon, bsNyen bsnyung, the dGag dbye, sNgags rgyun, dBu rtse mar chen, sNgags
rgyun mar chen, 'Khor chen, Khyi khrud, gSar 'phar, and sPyi gso. The expenses
of the eight-day ritual of A dkar are met by the chief of Bu rdzum. Funds for the
above-mentioned activities are raised from livestock and farmland production. In the
old days, it was with tea and silver that they raised funds to erect the so-called Four
Stupas (mChod rten bzhi) of Nag po spam chen. Out of the funds, they must save
cash to hand over so that the budget for the rest of the year might be met. There was
a special rule in the monastery that according to the amount of the funds, four or two
monks must take responsibility in turn for the funds.
With regard to monastic discipline, the legal document of the monastery serves
as its basis. For example, if a monk breaks one of the four primary rules, he must
be punished with a fine of eighteen tam rdo and he must find a substitute to be his
replacement. Although the monastery used to be called "the Sixty Monastic College
125



of gSa'mda'", because it had only sixty monks, it actually now has more than one
hundred monks. The regulations of the monastery are very strict. The monks are
not even allowed to wear undershirts at any time, and even in the courtyard of the
public houses, including the four or five monks' quarters, they were under close
surveillance.
During the recent period of its history (i.e., the Cultural Revolution) the
monastery declined markedly for many internal and external reasons. However, it
was rebuilt in 1985. Several religious objects hidden and kept safe by the senior
monk Byang chub grags pa, bs Tan 'dzin bzang po and the dKar ya nge family were
returned to the monastery. Do rgyal kha ba rNam rgyal dbang grags of the Zhu
family purchased a complete set of the bka''gyur in two hundred volumes printed in
Chengdu, and presented it to the monastery.
After all this, at present this monastery is in pretty good condition in terms of
size and equipment, and has come out as one of the principal Bonpo monasteries of
Nag chu region. In the monastery there are three lamas, including Lama Nyi zla tshe
dbang, mentioned above, who is very learned in Bon culture, and there are about
forty-seven monks.
A trip of about 250 kilometres from 'Bri ru rdzong takes us to sBra chen
rdzong.
126



SNye-rong County
sBra-chen County
"Bri-lung
ri
rTswa-la
ru
Sog-County
Tag - thang
Tshwa-chu
County
A
---ã Long-chu
Namcn
Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
SgYang-shold
did
royal
ag
County Seat
@ Township Seat
Administrative Village
Monastery
County Border
River
Road
Footpath
1/1,080,000
dPal-'bar County
Athchu
Samda 4.dgon
Lha-ri County



(20) Sen tsha Monastery
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)
11 HUGO
(22) Klu mkhar Monastery
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)
128



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
(25) gSa mdal Monastery. Nyi zla tshe dbang, the head lama of the
monastery
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)
129



sBra chen rdzong
sBra chen rdzong is located in north-eastern Tibet. It is 10,326 square
kilometres in area and averages 4,500 metres in altitude. The people of the rzdong all
believe in the Bon religion. There are two qu and six xiang within the jurisdiction of
the rdzong-sBra chen qu, Glashi xiang, skar rgod xiang, gYa'mnga' xiang, Chab
mda xiang, Ye tha xiang, Cang smad qu and Mam tha xiang - within which there
are 161 village committees.
The place name sBra chen is an abbreviation of sBra gur chen po, which means
the big yak-hair tent". There used to be many of these and they were also called
Khri langs stong bzhugs, which means that such a tent could hold ten thousand
people standing and one thousand seated.
Hor sBra chen originally belonged to Sum pa, a part of the Tibetan empire.
During the Mongol empire it was under the local Hor kings who paid allegiance
to the Mongol emperors of China. During the Ming dynasty of China it was
incorporated into Sichuan province, and during the Manchu rule it was one of the
Thirty-nine Tribes (Tsho ba so dgu). In the time of the emperor Guang xu, it was
taken back by the Tibetan government. In 1941, the Tibetan government established
Hor sBra chen rdzong. After China's "peaceful liberation" of Tibet in 1951, it came
under the jurisdiction of the liberation committee of Chab mdo, and in 1959, the
people's commune of sBra chen rdzong was set up. In 1960, it was transferred to the
jurisdiction of the Nag chu regional committee.
The whole population of the rdzong, 30,000, followed the Bon religion. Before
the democratic reform was carried out, Bonpo monasteries were not allowed to tile
their roofs and, they did not have anything like real estate, farmland, taxpayers or
servants, but just a few livestock that could not even cover living expenses. Because
of this, they had to live on the help received from each household and on the visiting
prayer services they provided. Bonpo monasteries had neither privileges nor duties
to provide labour or pay tax to the Tibetan government.
Around the time of democratic reform in the rdzong there were nine Bonpo
monasteries with 1,031 monks, and six hermitages with twenty-three monks. After
the democratic reform, all the monasteries were totally destroyed except Klu phug,
Lung dkar and Phur nag Monasteries, and these three remained monasteries only in
name.
In 1978 restoration of monasteries was started and there are now eight Bonpo
monasteries that have been rebuilt. In these there are 520 monks. There is one
hermitage in which three illustrious sages live: Rag shu rTogs Idan Dri med g-yung
drung, Kha borTogs Idan Shes rab phun tshogs and A drung Tshul khrims dga' ba.
The local population in the vicinities of the monasteries in dBra chen rdzong is
as follows:
1. Klu phug Monastery: 2,835 people in 399 households
130



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
2. Phur nag Monastery: 2,835 people in 445 households
3. sPatshang and sPa ma Monasteries: 4,624 people in 736 households
4. Lung dkar Monastery: 3,476 people in 469 households
5. Ma rong and Khrom tshang Monasteries: 3,827 people in 510 households
6. sGang ru Monastery: 1,459 people in 236 households
On the whole, sBra chen rdzong is an important bastion of the Bon religion.
Today the Bonpo monasteries in this rdzong are kept in good condition in many
respects.
(26) sPa tshang Monastery
sPa tshang dgon gYung drung rab brtan gling belongs to Ye tha xiang and can
be reached within ten minutes, walking from sBra chen rdzong. It was founded in
1847 by sPa ston gYung drung nam bzang, who was of the holy spa lineage. The spa
is one of the six sacred families: Bru, Zhu, gShen, spa, rMe'u and Khyung. The Bon
Sources and some other historical documents give reasons why the sPa family is
important:
Ha bu sPa ba spa thog, a son of Sangs po and Chu Icam, was born in heaven
He descended to earth from rTsa gsum lha and preached Bon. Then he went to
Zhang zhung Nam rgyal ha rtse. From there he went to the Crystal Cave on Mount
Ti se where he practised meditation on the tutelary deity Me ri for three years and so
attained the divine body and was called Kri smon Icags kyi bya ru can. At that time,
in Zhang zhung, people used to say, “In the sky the divine son is beautiful. On earth
the king is great." IHa bu's descendants were ancestors of the spa family and some
of its members held the position of prelate at the court of kings of Tibet.
sPa ston Khyung 'bar, who had obtained spiritual power of mysticism in the
latter stage of Bon development, demonstrated his acquired abilities. He transformed
himself into a wrathful deity in order to subdue heretics and into a garuda bird to
subdue the naga spirits.
Other masters who belonged to the sPa family were as prodigious:
1. Zhig po kun itse
2. Shes rab rgyal mtshan
3. sParTogs Idan drang srong
4. Pa ston Gyal ba shes rab
5. Pa ston dPal Idan bzang po
6. Nyi dpal bzang po
There were other masters of the sPa lineage who were based at La phug in
Western Tibet called the "Thirteen good masters" (sPa bla bzang po bcu gsum); to
name six of them, we have the following:
1. Zla rgyal bzang po
2. s Tobs chen bzang po
131



3. dPal mchog bzang po
4. dPal 'bar bzang po
5. mKhas grub Nam mkha' bzang po
6. gYung drung bzang po
However, their seat in Western Tibet declined and some members of the family
migrated to mDo smad.
One of these was sPa ston gYung drung rgyal po, who had two sons: dGra
'dul bstan rgyal and bSod nams dbang grags. They proceeded from Amdo to the
domain of the Hor Ye tha tribe and finally settled there. Their offspring were g Yung
drung nam bzang, Hun grub grags pa, Shes rab grags pa and Yon tan. gYung drung
nam bzang became the prelate of the king of Hor and later he founded sPa tshang
Monastery. After that, the centre of activities of the sPa family was shifted from west
to east. All Bonpo sources agree that the monastery in Hor Ye tha constituted the
most important monastic centre of the sPa lineage.
The manner in which sPa tshang Monastery was founded in the region of the
present Hor Ye tha tribe is as follows:
In the time of spa gYung drung nam bzang, sNang ston Zla ba rgyal mtshan
arrived in Hor on a visit. When he took a night's lodging near the site of the future
sPa tshang Monastery, he regarded the place, from the point of view of topography,
as auspicious, and thought of founding a monastery there. His idea finding agreement
with the king of Hor, construction began with the six-pillared assembly hall and
its contents. Nam mkha' sgron gsal and Nyi ma 'bum gsal of the sPa family added
another assembly hall and its ornaments. Nyi ma 'bum gsal also obtained a complete
set of bka' 'gyur and had a temple of the gSas mkhar mchog Inga built. He also had
several big gilt stupas made.
Later, sPa ston gYung drung bstan pa 'brug grags had other assembly halls
built, with passages around them, on the three storeys of a building that had one
hundred pillars. He also had the following religious objects erected: a stupa of
bDud 'dul sgra sgrags, and statues of sTon pa rdzogs sku and rNam par rgyal ba, all
gilt-bronze works. They were as high as a three-storey building. There were many
small images as well. There was also the temple of bkra shis sgo mang that had
twenty-pillars and contained a stupa of bkra shis sgo mang, a giant reliquary stupa
and gilt-bronze images of rGyal ba rgya mtsho and Mra seng as tall as a three-storey
building. He also had a large number of new religious objects built in the gTso bzhi
temple.
The Bonpo doctrine was spread widely through the setting up of a flawless
preaching school, under the system of the monastic tradition of Manri (No. 1) and
gYung drung gling (No.2) as well as the teachings of Shar rdza, the one who attained
the "rainbow-body". Thus the members of the sPa family made the Bon religion
flourish there.
132



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
The lineage of the masters of sPa tshang Monastery in Ye tha is as follows:
1. sPa g Yung drung nam bzang
2. sPa ston Nam mkha'sgrol gsal
3. sPa ston Nyi ma 'bum gsal
4. sPa ston g Yung drung bstan pa 'brug grags (alias 'Brug Rinpoche)
5. sPa bsTan pa rgyal mtshan (alias Nyi 'bum sprul sku)
6. sPu la Zla ba rgyal mtshan
7. bs Tan pa 'brug grags
8. Kho bo Tog Idan Shes rab phun tshogs
The last master did not belong to the lineage of the sPa family, but observed the
rules of monastic discipline according to the sPa tradition.
Among the above-mentioned lamas, Nyi ma 'bum gsal, who was very active in
the development process of the monastery, is described in some historical documents
as follows:
He was born in 1825. He took full ordination in the presence of Zhu ston Gyal
mtshan nyi ma and mKhan chen skal bzang bstan pa'i nyi ma and heard teachings
from these masters. He acquired an extraordinary knowledge of Buddhism and Bon
under the tutelage of Me ston Nyi ma rgyal mtshan, 'Gro mgon Shes rab g.yung
drung, Grub dbang bs Tan 'dzin rin chen and g Ter ston Tshe dbang grags pa. As
mentioned above, he had temples built and various statues made as well as making
copies of the bka' gyur and Ka'bren. Having established the practice of preaching
and meditating, he passed away at the age of sixty-seven.
Another important figure in the development of spa tshang Monastery was
gYung drung bstan pa 'brug grags. He was born in 1832. He took ordination at an
early age in the presence of his paternal uncle, Nyi ma 'bum gsal. He received the
entire course of initiation, transmissions and explanations of Sutra, Tantra and Mind.
While practising these three, he also studied and became very learned. He wrote
many books, about ten volumes on Bon, and established a school of metaphysical
studies in the monastery. He had a gilt stupa of bkra shis sgo mang built, and another
stupa of bDud 'dul sgra sgrags, as mentioned above. His deeds and name came to be
known all around, and he passed away at the age of sixty.
Annual Religious Services and Rituals
1. At the end of the 11th Tibetan month the ritual of sTag la me 'bar was
performed for five days.
2. In the 12th month, at the end of the year, the dgu chen ritual based on the
ritual cycles of Kho bo and Phur pa was performed over seven days, and on
the 30th day the ceremony of confession was held.
3. In the 1st month flower offerings, A dkar bum sgrub and bCo Inga mchod pa
were performed, occupying seventeen days in all.
133



4. In the 2nd month the ritual based on the mKha' klong gsang mdos was
performed for nine days.
5. In the 3rd month Dus chen che mo was performed for seventeen days, as well
as religious dances (dbang 'cham) and the ritual based on the Rig 'dzin gsang
sgrub
6. In the 6th month the rituals of Ma rgyud and rNam rgyal were performed and
the summer retreat was observed for seventeen days.
7. In the 7th month the ritual based on the Zhi khro was performed for fourteen
days.
8. In the 8th month the ritual of Ma tri bum sgrub was performed for nine days
and there were religious dances.
9. In the 10th month a debate on metaphysics was conducted for ten days.
The organization of the monastery at that time consisted of the following:
- mkhan po
- dpon slob
- dbu mdzad
-dge bskos
- grwa dpon
- phyag mdzod
- spyi gso
- gnyer pa
There were 250 monks in the monastery.
In the assembly hall and at its porch, there were excellent murals of deities. In
the assembly hall from the right, there were the following:
1. Srid rgyal Drel dmar: a goddess with a dark blue body, three faces and six
arms; the three faces are of different colours, the right being white, the left
red, and the centre blue. She holds a zhing dbyug (a stuffed object made of
human skin), a sword and a sash in her three right hands, and in the left three
are a swastika, a trident and a skull cup. She is adorned with rosaries of fresh
skulls around her neck and rosaries of dry skulls on her limb joints. She is
mounted on a red mule whose four legs are supported by the Four Great
Kings.
2. mKha' dbyings tha mo: a goddess with a red body, nine heads and eighteen
arms. She is mounted on a white mule in a state exhibiting bravery.
3. Dus yum lha mo: a goddess with a blue body, nine heads and eight arms. She
is mounted on a blue mule and has a frightening air.
4. Srid rgyal drel nag ma: a goddess with a dark blue body, three heads and six
arms. Her faces being white to the right, red to the left and blue in the centre,
she possesses a perfect beauty. She holds a banner, a sword and a peg in her
three right hands, and a mirror, an iron hook and a skull filled with blood in



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
the left three. Mounted on a black mule, she presents a wrathful appearance.
5. Bya ra ma gsum: 1) dKar mo srid rgyal: a goddess with a white body, one
head and two arms. Sitting astride a bird, she exhibits a comfortable wrath.
2) sMug po srid rgyal: a goddess with a brown body, one head and two arms.
Riding a leaping mule, she exhibits a terrifying air. 3) Nag mo srid rgyal: a
goddess with a blue body, one head and two arms. In some murals she is
mounted on a Garuda and in others an iron wolf,
6.rDzu 'phrul sman bzhi: 1) gNam phyi gung rgyal: a single headed, two-armed
goddess with a white body. Riding a snow lion, she exhibits a brave look.
2) Ye phyi gung sangs: a single-headed, two-armed, yellow-bodied divinity,
Mounted on a dragon, she has an air of glory. 3) Phyi ma ye sangs: a divinity
with one head, two arms and a red body. She is a terrifying divinity riding a
Garuda. 4) gNam sman che mo: a goddess with a dark blue body, one head
and two arms, Riding a sheep, she shows an air of magnificence.
7. Ma gyud yi dam gsang mchog: a divinity with a blue body, seven heads
and sixteen arms. Possessing Garuda's wings, he shows an air of passionate
wrath
8. Tag la me 'bar: a divinity with a red body, one head and two arms. His
attributes are a gold wheel in his right hand, lifted up into the sky, and nine
crossed swords in the left hand.
9. Phur pa, the Deity of Action: a divinity with a blue body, three heads and six
arms; the lower part of his body is in the form of a frightening dagger.
10. dBal chen Ge khod, the Deity of Virtue: a divinity with a blue body, nine
heads and sixteen arms. He presents fierce looks while holding, to his
bosom, his consort, who has a red body, three heads and six arms and is in
In his peaceful form, he is called A ti mu wer in the Zhang zhung
language, and Sangs rgyas mkha'rgyal in Tibetan.
11. gTso mchog mkha' 'gyings, the Deity of Mind: a divinity with a blue body,
three heads and six arms. His consort has a red body, one head and two
arms. When in his peaceful form, he is called g Yung drung yongs rdzogs.
12. Ha rgod thog pa, the Deity of Speech: a divinity with a blue body, four
heads and eight arms. His consort has a green body, one head and two arms.
In his peaceful form he appears as Mra bali seng ge.
13. dBal gsas mgam pa, the Deity of Body: a divinity with a blue body. Adorned
with a tiger, snow lion, Garuda and a dragon above his head, he presents a
wrathful appearance. His peaceful form is kun bzang rgyal ba 'dus pa.
14. Mi bdud 'byams pa khrag mgo: Ge ta gergya in the Zhang zhung language,
he has a dark blue body, one head and two arms. He brandishes an axe in his
right hand, and holds either a bow and arrow or a black banner in his left.
He is mounted on an otter or a black horse.
135



Besides all these, there are the Four Principal Peaceful Deities (bDe gshegs gtso
bzhi) of Sutra rituals, rNam par rgyal ba and Gyal ba rgya mtsho with a thousand
arms and a thousand eyes.
Below the porch the murals of the wheel of existence and the Four Great Kings
were drawn. All this vividly shows the particular tradition of the Bonpo tradition.
sPa tshang Monastery in Hor Ye tha was an important seat of the spa family,
and it still plays an important role as the centre of the sPa tradition. At present, this
monastery's chief lamas are Kho bo rTogs Idan Shes rab phun tshogs, bsTan pa 'brug
grags and Nam mkha' dbang grub, skal bzang dbang grags, the aged dance master
of sPa tshang Monastery, is very skilled in the art of the 'cham dance. Twice a year,
therefore, they customarily perform religious dances. They maintain the art of 'cham
well and have good costumes for it. In fact, we saw the staging of the cham dance
based on the Rig 'dzin gsang sgrub, which consists of several dances, such as gSer
skyem, mTshams bead, sPyan 'bebs, sPyan 'dren, rNam brgyadtshogs 'cham, sku
bstod, Nang 'cham and others. These are of the Bonpo tradition but have unique
features. The present sPa tshang Monastery has over one hundred monks, and the
religious activities are kept in the way they used to be.
(27) Lung dkar Monastery
The monastery's full name is Ye tha Lung dkar dgon gShen bstan rin chen
gling, Travelling thirty-odd kilometres from sBra chen rdzong, we reach Ye tha
xiang, Lung dkar Monastery is located on top of a hill at the western outskirts of the
xiang. It is possible to approach the gate of the monastery in a car, but the track to
the top of the hill is not very good.
The seat of Lun dkar Monastery is called Upper Ye tha, and that of sPa tshang
Monastery Lower Ye tha. The limpid stream gliding past the front of sBra chen
rdzong is called Ye chu. Ye tha, which is one of the Thirty-nine Tribes”, is an
important local community.
Lung dkar Monastery derives its name from the local deity (gzhi bdag) Lung
dkar. He is a deity that wears a hat made of felt, holds a gem in his right hand and is
mounted on a white horse.
The predecessor of this monastery is said to be Sog gYung drung gling (already
mentioned in connection with the Zhu family in the section of 'Bri ru rdzong).
It was located in Cham mda', the border area of the two rdzong, sBra chen and
Sog. At present, to the best of my memory, this area is no more than a vast plain with
a stone dyke and many prayer flags fluttering. Concerning Sog gYung drung gling
Monastery, the skal bzang mgrin rgyan, a Bonpo work, describes it as follows:
"It is not certain when this monastery was founded, but it certainly existed in
the Third Rab byung (1147-1206). There were four monastic colleges and more than
two thousand monks. It is said that the establishment was so big that horn-calls for
136



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
assemblies had to be blown in the four directions.
There were two official residences, Zhu and Khyung po. Many accomplished
scholars from other monasteries, including the lamas of the 'Brug stan family, came
to the monastery. The principal ones among them - mKhas btsun Nam mkha''od
zer, mNga' ris bSod nams rgyal mtshan, Khyung sgom g Yung drung 'od zer, Zhu
Khri 'od rgyal mtshan, Khyung po dPon dge, dPon rin and others -- stayed there
and developed the monastery to a great degree. However, it was totally destroyed by
the Mongolian troops of Jungar."
After the destruction of Sog gYung drung gling by the barbarous Mongolian
Jungar, the Mongol hordes plundered several important religious objects, which they
carried away and gave to Sog Tsan dan dgon, an important dGe lugs pa monastery
situated in the same region.
The belongings of lamas of Khyung and dBu, who were members of thirteen
individual establishments in Sog gYung drung gling, and some irreplaceable sacred
objects, including the golden statue of sTag la me 'bar and the skull of dBu ri lama,
were given to Lung dkar Monastery. This was why Lung dkar Monastery considered
Sogg Yung drung gling to be its predecessor,
Lung dkar Monastery's history can be presented in three parts. First, in 1715,
Chos 'bum, chief of the Hor Ye tha tribe, and his son Mukhri rgyal ba tshul khrims,
who was a lama, founded the hermitage called Ri khrod dkar po in Lung bzang. The
objective of this was to perform religious services for the lama and peace in the region.
In that year bsKal bzang rgya mtsho, the Seventh Dalai Lama, passed through the
Hor area from mGar thar in Khams on horseback. Chos 'bum successfully solicited
him to issue a decree officially recognizing the hermitage. But after the death of Mu
khri rgyal ba tshul khrims, the hermitage collapsed due to internal discord.
Second, Ye tha Nor bu tshe rgyal, the scholar bSod nams Ihun grub of dBu ri
house and dBra Khyung rGyal ba bstan'dzin founded gYu lung Monastery in 1808
at the same place. The king of Hor, Tshe ring rab brtan, issued a proclamation, with
a preamble by rTa tshag Ho thog thu of Kun bde gling in Lhasa, that this monastery,
which was an establishment for the leaders of the Ye tha community, should be lead
by the lamas of sPo la and dBu ri. It actually became a real monastery from the time
of dBu bla Gyal ba tshul khrims, the reincarnation of Mukhri, and it was called g Yu
lung. However, in 1868 it was destroyed by an avalanche of snow.
Third, rNam rgyal dbang 'dus, the king of Hor, then gave orders that the
monastery should be restored at once, for it was an extremely bad omen that the
monastery was destroyed by an avalanche and he gave twenty 'bri (young female
yaks), along with a measure of Chinese silver, as a contribution to the restoration of
the monastery. In 1925, on the 22nd day of the 9th month, dBra khyung skal bzang
dbang grags and dBu ribsTan 'dzin dbang rgyal --- supported by the local people
and in accordance with a prophecy by g Yung drung dbang rgyal, the Twentieth abbot
137



of Man ri-began to restore the monastery. On this occasion, important prelates of
the Bon religion, such as Nyag gter gSang sngags gling pa, his wife mKha' 'gro bDe
chen dbang mo and Me ston Kun dga' rgyal mtshan all came and the monks of the
monastery, joined by the local people, welcomed them with a procession.
On the same occasion, at the holy mountain called gSang brag nor bu lha rtse
situated behind the monastery, the secret abode of the three wrathful deities blessed
by the three holy ones, a profound text was rediscovered by gSang sngags gling pa
and he, after tracing the path of circumambulation of the mountain, wrote a guide to
it. There was a performance of the debate between gods and demons, in which the
gods won and their sons went up to occupy the upper part of the Lung dkar valley
and those of demons defeated went down to the lower part of the valley.
Around the holy mountain there are other mountains such as gYu lung, Lung
dkar and dByi dkar with all their spirit proprietors. The proprietor of Mount dByi
dkar is a white Tibetan lynx as the name indicates. There is a "soul-lake" (bla mtsho)
called Ma ma mtsho, which is said to be the source of the lake of Ma pang gYu
mtsho. There are footprints of gShen rab Mi bo and mKha''gro bDe chen dbang mo,
and the treasure cave of gSang sngags gling pa as well as the meditation caves of
the eighty adepts. There is also the head-print in the rock of dBu ribSod nams rgyal
mtshan.
The principal religious objects of this monastery were as follows: the bronze
statue of gShen rab Mi bo that remained unburned when Sog gYung drung gling
Monastery was destroyed; a five-finger-breadth-high bronze statue of gNam phyi
gung rgyal; a statue of Kun dga'rgyal mtshan that had not been caught in the fire; an
icon of gShen lha 'od dkar drawn on cotton; the skull of the dBu ribs Tan 'dzin phun
tshogs, which contains his skylark-egg-size relic; a ghost-exorcising knotted knife
used by dBu riskar ma rgyal mtshan; a small white conch derived from a Khyung
Zla sras can and a self-grown letter A. Similarly, there were a great many scriptures,
including a complete set of bka' 'gyur and bka' brten.
There were four important lamas in this monastery: dBu rGyal ba tshul khrims,
sPo bSod nams g-yung drung, sGang ru bsTan pa kun khyab and dBu Tshul khrims
rgyal mtshan. From among these, I shall give a brief account of Gyal ba tshul
khrims and Tshul khrims rgyal mtshan:
dBu Gyal ba tshul khrims was born in 1864 to the father Rin chen phun tshogs
and the mother dMar rtsa bza', as their second son among four - the eldest bSod
nams g Yung drung, the second himself, the third skar ma rgyal mtshan and the
youngest bsTan dzin phun tshogs. From childhood, he had an intellectual power
incomparable with any other children. gSang sngags gling pa mentioned his name in
his book on a prophetic lineage entitled the skyes phreng gsol 'debs as follows:
"The emanation who converts the sentient beings may come having the
following names:
138



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
Yongs su dag pa, the gShen of the gods, in heaven;
Dam pa rgya gar, the great saint;
Uri bsod nams rgyal mtshan, the incomparable;
Shes rab seng ge, in the land of rGyal rong;
Ban de Rin chen, in the valley of Kong po,
bSod nams ye shes, in g Tsang;
Gyal ba tshul khrims, in the land of Gyi ghir.
To this lineage of rosary of pearl I pray."
dBu Gyal ba tshul khrims was exceedingly intelligent when he was young.
He could grasp, when he was just showing how to write, read and recite, which
brought him public praise. When a deep compassion for the cyclic existence arose
in his heart, he became absorbed in meditation in hermitages and accomplished his
self-training. In the presence of spa ston Nyi ma 'bum gsal, Nyag gter gSang sngags
gling pa and Grub dbang sMon lam rgyal mtshan he took initiations and received
the very essence of the ocean of precepts. He excelled in all learning. Not only that,
he showed signs of unparalleled spiritual accomplishment. His name, rGyal ba tshul
khrims, became widely known all over the district, like an ensign fluttering. He was
only seven when he took over responsibility as the head of Lung dkar Monastery,
and passed away at the age of ninety-six.
As for dBu Tshul khrims rgyal mtshan, he was born in 1924 as the eldest of four
sons of the father skal bzang bstan 'dzin and the mother Zo bza' dgyes skyid. When
he was six he began writing and reading, and before long he attained the highest
perfection. He took ordination to enter the priesthood in the presence of dBu Gyal
ba tshul khrims and received the name Tshul khrims rgyal mtshan. He received
complete instruction in the rediscovered holy texts in the presence of Tri bo bSod
nams rgyal mtshan, and learned metaphysics mainly from Khyung slob Tshul khrims
rgyal mtshan. He spent six years learning such subjects as grammar, phonetics,
poetics, dkar rtsis and nag rtsis, chanting and mandala-painting. As he also studied
Sutra, Tantra and Mind, he became a veritable scholar.
In the presence of Gyal ba tshul khrims, Khyung po bZod ba rgyal mtshan,
sPa ston 'Brug Rinpoche and Khyung slob Tshul khrims rgyal mtshan, he asked for
numerous initiations and instructions on texts. In the presence of the Gyal tshab
Blo gros rgya mtsho he took a complete course of initiations and transmissions of
texts by Grub dbang Shar rdza, and took the dge tshul vows of monk. He worked
hard for Lung dkar Monastery to develop its study and practice and made sure that it
followed the Bru tradition. In 1984 he passed away. He was sixty-one.
Besides those mentioned above, this monastery has produced many other great
meditators: Tre bo bSod nams rgyal mtshan, brDa snga gYung drung rab brtan,
Gyes sum Byams pa tshul khrims and ICags tsha Tshul khrims bstan dbang, who all
gave their lives to meditation.
139



Practice of rituals and religious services of this monastery
1. In the 1st Tibetan month there is the commemoration of mNyam med Shes
rab rgyal mtshan.
2. In the 2nd month the A dkar bum sgrub ritual is performed.
3. In the 3rd month the ritual cycle of Khro bo and Phur pa is performed.
4. In the 5th month the propitiatory ritual for Bonpo religious protectors is
performed.
5. In the 6th month the ceremony of rNam rgyal stong mchod is held.
6. In the 7th month the Ma tri bum sgrub ritual is performed.
7. In the 8th month the Me tog mchod pa ceremony is held.
8. In the 11th month rituals based on the cycle of Khro bo are performed.
9. In the 12th month there is a performance of the complete ritual cycle of sTag
la me 'bar.
In each of the three winter months there is the performance of the dgu gtor
rite. In all, the monks gather together for eighty days of the year for the purpose of
performing rituals.
As for daily ceremonies, there is a morning assembly preceded by the sounding
of a big white conch, along with the playing of a long oboe and a drum. Tea is served
seven times a day, and meetings are observed seven times a day. The main rituals
are based on the following texts: Phur nag, Khro bo, Kun rig, rNam rgyal, Me tog
mchod pa, rGyal ba rgya mtsho, Kun rig, Byams ma, 'Dul chog, rNam 'joms, Man
tha, Dus 'khor, Phar phyin, kun dbyings, sMon lam mtha' yas, dGe benyen and
rNam dag.
The head and other leaders of the monastery in 1998 were as follows: the abbot
Nyi ma lhun grub, who was sixty-one years old; Tshul khrims 'byung gnas of Lung
nag, who was twenty-nine; Shad sgrub rab 'phel, also of the Lung nag lineage, who
was seventeen; bsTan 'dzin mtshungs med of the spa family, fifteen years old, and
Drang srong g-yung drung of sGrub, who was sixty-six.
Other members of the monastery were as follows: teacher, Drang srong gYung
drung, senior chanting conductor, Blo gros brtan pa; the younger chanting conductor,
Tshe dbang phun tshogs, and disciplinarian, gYung drung phun tshogs. There were
more than forty ordinary monks.
For the main source of income, the monks receive financial help from their own
families and they perform visiting services in the village one hundred days a year,
for which they are paid ten yuan each day. In summer, when the people leave for
gathering the dByar rtswa dgun 'bu ("grass in summer, worms in winter", Cordyceps
sinensis) in the mountains, most of the monks return home and help look after their
families' livestock. The monastery itself has no property apart from about thirty
yaks.
140



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngarl regions
(28) Gra rgyal Monastery
Gang ru sGra rgyal Monastery is situated in Cang smad qu, sBra chen rdzong.
The qu is ninety kilometres north of the rdzong, and the monastery is reached by
travelling two hours further northward on horseback.
In this nomad area of sGang ru, initially, a lama from Khyung po founded
a monastery called Chu lung dgon, which, after a long time, declined. After that,
another lama, also from Khyung po, founded a monastery in the same place and
called it Na g-yang dgon, which also collapsed, having nobody to look after it.
Thereafter, for a long period there was neither a communal leader nor a lama. Many
believers longed for a new monastery to be built.
At that time, however, there was a monk named Tshul khrims rgyal mtshan,
who was the former chief teacher in g Yung drung gling Monastery (No.2). He was
himself a native of sGang ru. He had a great reputation as an accomplished scholar
After leaving his duty in g Yung drung gling he devoted himself to meditation for
eight years on the island of the lake Gyer ru mtsho. He had a close connection with
the chief of the Kre ba tribe, one of the seven Sa skya tribes that inhabited the area
around the lake gNam mtsho. The monks and laymen of the sGang ru Byang ma
district held repeated discussions and sent bsTan pa lhun grub as a delegate to invite
Tshul khrims rgyal mtshan, who, however, refused to accept the invitation. This left
the people of sGang ru helpless. The following year, Tshe rab, the brother of Tshul
khrims rgyal mtshan, appealed to him and this time he agreed to come
Tshul khrims rgyal mtshan returned on horseback to his native land. He looked
for a good site and in 1957 he founded sGra rgyal Monastery in front of Mount Gung
sman yul sa. This mountain had the look of a white conch and is situated at the back
of the monastery.
The monastery closely followed, in all its ceremonies, the tradition of
gYung drung gling. There was the performance of the ritual cycle of Khro bo, the
commemoration of sNang ston Zla ba rgyal mtshan and annual rituals such as the
Zhi khro khri mchod and rNam rgyal stong mchod. The head of the monastery was
1Ha dge of Khyung nag. He was assisted by Dung pa me gsas and Kar yu.
As for religious objects, the monastery possessed a gilt-bronze statue of rNam
par rgyal ba, another statue of Sa trig er sangs and a complete manuscript set of
the bKa' gyur. There was also a large gilt-bronze reliquary stupa of bZod pa rgyal
mtshan, which bDud 'dul of Khyung po had had made.
At present the monastery has fifty-five monks. It has several chapels and some
religious objects.
(29) A krong Hermitage
From Bra chen rdzong, driving twenty-four kilometres westward on the
highway and then another ten kilometres northward, we come to skar rgod xiang. A
141



krong Hermitage is reached by travelling nine more kilometres eastward. It is at an
altitude not less than 5,000 metres, and because of the difficulty the ascent presents
to cars, one must go on foot from the bottom of the hill.
The hermitage was established by rTogs ldan Tshul khrims dga' ba in 1981 at a
place where previously there was nothing but a cemetery and a small temple. At the
spot backed by the holy mountain A krong and fronted with another holy mountain,
Yi ge, he built a temple adorned with religious objects of body, speech and mind,
and a mural of local deities of considerable quality. Although it is not very long since
the hermitage was established, it has been a place of pilgrimage for many people
because of the cemetery, which is regarded as very special
With regard to the way the monks perform funeral rites, they maintain the
distinct traits of Bonpo tradition. Firstly, at the death of a person, the family invites
a monk called the dbugs chad lama, and then on the 3rd day another monk called
the zhag gsum lama, to whom it presents a horse saddle. On the forty-ninth day the
family invites a monk called the zhe dgu lama. The funeral rite is based on the Kun
rig. Many flat, hand-sawn wooden boards are inscribed with scriptures in gold and
silver to be burned in the cremation. So for the funeral rite, a rich family spends over
100,000 yuan and one that is not so rich about 50,000. For very poor families, it has
been a custom to leave the corpse strewn with barley flour up in the mountains.
No more than three monks reside in this hermitage.
(30) Phur nag Monastery
The monastery's full name is Phur nag dgon gYung drung 'o tshal gling.
Travelling from A krong Hermitage back to skar god xiang, then sixteen kilometres
towards the north, which includes a river-crossing on the way, we arrive at Phur nag
Monastery. It was easy going for us, with a Tantrist guide who had a fearful look.
This is an excellent Bonpo tantric establishment, a glance at which can inspire
one with delight and awe. It was founded in 1864 by bSod nams g-yung drung, a
Tantrist of A skyid, and his assistant, Dar dga'. Before the tantric establishment,
it is said that there was a custom of the local community making offerings on the
15th day of the month at the same site. Sod nams g-yung drung, the founder of the
establishment, belonged to a long lineage of able Tantric practitioners. He was much
respected by the local people as he was able to perform the funeral rite for the dead
and carry out religious services for the living. Lama Dar dga' was also esteemed as
he belonged to the lineage of rMe'u.
As the main tutelary deity of the establishment was dBal phur nag po, it was
called Phur nag. The temple and assembly hall had their religious objects and were
fully equipped. In the temple there were statues of gSas mkhar mchog Inga and
Bonpo religious protectors in all their majesty. As there was a fair number of Tantric
practitioners in Phur nag it was one of the three famous Tantric establishments in the
142



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
Hor region known as Klu rTing Phur gsum, i.e. Klu phug (No.31), Ting ngu (No.12)
and Phur nag (No.30). The ritual tradition of Phur nag followed closely those of the
families gShen, Bru, Zhu and Me'u.
The monastery has murals of its own protective local deities, which are as
follows:
1. Gyal mtshan po: a deity with one head and two arms. His body is white like
a conch, and he holds a white conch in his right hand and a jewel in his left,
He is mounted on a white horse.
2. Yi ge rag sna: a local deity with a red body, one head and two arms. Holding
a red lance in his right hand and a lasso in his left, he is mounted on a
stallion.
3. mKhan chen: a local deity that resides to the left of the mountain behind the
monastery complex. He has one head, two arms and a snow-white body.
Mounted on a light-bay horse, he holds a lance with a banner in his right
hand and a white conch in his left. He exhibits a peaceful air.
4. 'Brig gu: a local deity with a white body, one head and two arms. Holding a
white conch in his right hand and a jewel in his left, he is mounted on a white
yak with a turquoise mane.
There were a number of mural paintings of other local deities as well.
As for activities, offerings are made on the 15th day of each month. The
practitioners gather together for religious services eight times during the year.
Formerly the establishment had about seventy inmates. At present, there are
sixty-six, who continue reviving the earlier tradition.
(31) Klu phug Monastery
The monastery's full name is Klu phug dgon gYung drung bde chen gling.
From Phur nag Monastery, there is a direct road that leads to Klu phug Monastery,
but it is a trip of extreme difficulty and danger. To the right of the road stretches a
high mountain range with yawning craggy abysses. To the left runs the reddish river
Sog chu, swirling waves. Before reaching the monastery seven narrow ledges must
be traversed, the mere sight of which can make one's hair stand on end. People
call these the "Seven ledges intermediate between death and rebirth" (bar ma
do'i 'phrang bdun). Thus we arrive at rDza gseb xiang. This xiang is completely
surrounded by green-clad mountains. Herds - black, white or other colours - on the
verdant plain look just like the stars scattered in the sky. To the far north-west of
the xiang is a high, white, rocky hill that looks like an elderly monkey sitting on his
haunches, the appearance of which may strike one as strange,
To reach Klu phug Monastery, which is situated in sBra chen qu, one must
travel further away from the riverbank, It is one hundred kilometres from the rdzong
to the monastery, but twenty-four kilometres of this can be covered conveniently by
143



car on the highway.
Here I shall give an account of where and how this monastery originated: this
monastery is situated on the upper part of Brag dkar lha lung valley in Bra chen qu.
On the hill at the back of the monastery there was a cave in which, it is believed, a
water spirit klu lived. That is why the monastery is called Klu phug.
There was a Tantric establishment called mKhar dmar bla brang founded
in 1626 by Khri rgyal rje chen, the twelfth king of the Thirty-nine Tribes of Hor.
He was a tantric practitioner and followed both Bon and 'Bri gung bka'rgyud pa
traditions.
mKhar dmar was situated at a saddle-shaped craggy red hill called Gung lhag.
It was a two-storey building. On the top of the roof it had various emblems unique
to the ancient Bon tradition, such as the perch of birds. In the centre and at the four
corners of the roof there were spears erected and decorated with yak's hair on their
tips, surrounded by deer and wild yak horns. In the assembly hall on the upper
floor there were four pillars and it was the place where twelve Tantric practitioners
gathered together. There were the following religious objects: clay images of the
four-armed sPyan ras gzigs, Grol dkar, rNam par rgyal ba and Khri gtsug rgyal
ba; scriptures, including the Khams chen in sixteen volumes and the bDal 'bum in
twelve volumes; eight stupas made of a mixture of medicine and clay, each of which
was as tall as an arrow. On the west side of the floor there was a single-pillared
meditation room in which Khri rgyal rje chen erected gilt-bronze statues of Kun
bzang rgyal ba 'dus pa and dBal gas mgam pa (this statue still exists) less than
a cubit in height. These had been concealed in the ground at Sham po during the
suppression of Bon in Central Tibet and was rediscovered by Ma ston Ha rgod Shes
rab seng ge. Moreover, there were images of Dran pa nam mkha' with his twin sons
made of the li from Zhang zhung, a span in height (two of these statues still exist).
These were rediscovered in Phyug mo dpal ri by Bon zhig gYung drung gling pa.
The Twelve Tantrists, including sGrub khang Khri rgyal, took turns performing
the ritual cycle of dBal gsas. They performed the dgu gtor rite at the end of the 12th
Tibetan month. As for the ritual tradition - recitation, chanting, playing the musical
instruments - they followed that of Zhu, both systems of ICags zam and Nag
tshang. The main religious protectors to whom they dedicated rites were the three
white, black and multi-coloured Thel.
In 1786, IHa mkhar bstan rgyal, the elder son of Khri rgyal rje chen, was
enthroned and maintained the mKhar dmar establishment as his father did. He
married gShen bza' dPal 'dzin, a lady of the gShen family. He abandoned his
family's tradition to follow 'Bri gung bka brgyud and was content to keep only the
Bon tradition. Dpal 'dzin, the queen, became a nun in her later life and lived in a
cave to devote herself to meditation. Her cave can still be visited.
Tshe ring rab brtan, the son of lHa mkhar, succeeded his father. However, he
144



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
was more concerned with politics. He had two tent residences. One of these two
was in Bra chen and it was in this that he used live and it became the seat of his
government.
In mKhar dmar, there was lHa bla bsTan pa phun tsbogs, who is said to be a
native of Gyal rong. He looked after the tantric establishment (which usually had
twelve tantrists). IHun grub 'od zer (alias Shang blang Drang srong) of rTing ngu
Monastery came to join him and he was ordained by bsTan pa phun tshogs. So
mKhar dmar started having monks in its midst. 1Ha bla also established there the
ritual practice of the Zhi khro dgongs 'dus according to the New Bon tradition. This
was to be performed in the 8th month every year.
Here is an account of how Klu phug Monastery was founded. In 1827 Nyi ma
bstan 'dzin, the twenty-third abbot of sMan ri Monastery (No. 1), travelled to the
region of Hor. He came and stayed in Klu phug Monastery. There he presided over
the ceremony of the enthronement of bsTan 'dzin dbang grays, the reincarnation
of Ha bla bsTan pa phun tshogs, at mKhar dmar bla brang. On the same occasion,
he encouraged bsTan 'dzin dbang grags and the twelve tantrists to take monastic
ordination. Klu phug then with its mKhar dmar bla brang became a real monastery
and the abbot gave it the name gShen bstan gYung drung bde chen gling and wrote
a monastic code for it entitled the Thar lam them skas, setting out regulations in
accordance with the Bonpo monastic tradition. Not only that, he issued an edict
establishing the monastery as being the first branch of sMan ri in the region. He
entrusted the monastic management to Ma bdud btsan rgyal bzhi, the Bonpo
protectors, and bestowed upon the monastery a large flat bell discovered in Gyal
rong Brag steng and it has been one of the principal religious objects of this
monastery up to the present day.
bsTan 'dzin dbang grags maintained the time-honoured custom of mKhar
dmar bla brang, except that the twelve tantrists were now all monks. He added an
eight-pillared assembly hall and established the commemoration of sTon pa gShen
rab's birthday on the 15th day of the 1st Tibetan month, and the performance of the
ritual Ma tri bum sgrub on the 15th day of the 8th month.
Later, bsTan pa dar rgyas, a prince of the royal house of Hor, became the head
of the monastery. In his childhood, he was recognized as the reincarnation of a
high lama in Gyal rong. So a number of gifts, including a copy of the Khams chen,
written in gold, were presented to Khri dbang rab brtan, the sixteenth king of Hor, in
the hope that he would permit the child to leave for rGyal rong. However, the king
was powerful enough to hold back the child (his own son) from leaving and returned
the gifts. So bsTan pa dar rgyas eventually decided himself to become a monk
and later ascended the throne of Klu phug Monastery. In addition to the dgu gtor
rite, formerly performed by the Twelve Tantrists, he established a new custom of a
complete ritual practice of the Red Yamantaka (gShin rje gshed dmar). Following
145



this, religious dances were performed, to which he added new dances: sNang bgyad,
Tshogs 'cham, and the Yamantaka.
rNam rgyal dbang 'dus, a brother of bs Tan pa dar rgyas, entered the priesthood
and succeeded his brother in the monastery, but the seventeenth king of Hor, Nor bu
dbang rgyal, died prematurely, so he had to leave the monk body and succeed to the
throne. As a confession (of having broken the monastic vows) a two-storey temple
with six pillars was build in the monastery. There were gilt-bronze statues of rNam
par rgyal ba and the Four Principal Buddhas, a span in height. Families of the 'Brog
shog and Bon tha tribes of the Thirty-seven Tribes of Hor took an oath that they
would send their second son (if there was one) to become a monk. From that point
the monastery began to have many monks.
bsTan pa rgyal mtshan, of the royal house of Hor, ascended the monastic
throne. From childhood he was faithful, industrious and intelligent, so that he
became the focus of praise from all the people. He took monastic vows at the age of
thirteen. After that, according to custom, he made offerings to the three monasteries,
including sMan ri. In the presence of skal bzang nyi ma, the second abbot of g Yung
drung gling, he took full ordination. He then set out on pilgrimage to Mount Ti
se and the soul-mountain of Bon in Zhang zhung and also the lake Ma pang g-yu
mtsho. There he made circumambulations and prostrations.
He then returned to his monastery where he had various stupas built, including
a reliquary stupa of a gShen lama in the form of g Yung drung bkod legs and another
reliquary stupa of bsTan pa dar rgyas in the form of rNam rgyal mchod rten made
of silver, the height of a person and adorned with varieties of vivid gems. He had a
temple built to house the stupas he had had made. His main spiritual masters were
gTer ston Nam mkhakhri khyung of Zhu and Grub dbang sMon lam rgyal mtshan
of Khyung po. g Ter ston g Yung drung grags pa of Zhu, who was the prelate of the
king Tshe ring rab brtan, made Mount Brag dkar lha lung, where the monastery is
situated into a sacred site and established a new custom of circumambulating the
sacred hill in the region.
bsTan pa rgyal tshan made copies, by himself, of the bka' 'gyur and bKa'brien
in vermilion ink and had a temple with eight pillars built to house them. This temple
also contained a gilt-bronze statue of sTon pa gShen rab and a reliquary stupa of Zhu
Nam mkha' khri khyung the height of an arrow. An assembly hall was also built,
with two storeys and six long pillars and sixty-six short ones. In the inner sanctuary
there was a complete set of ITung bshags lha 'khor of gilt-bronze. On the right wall
were murals of the Bya rgyud and sPyod rgyud deities. On the left wall were the
principal deities of the Ye shes and Ye she chen po'i rgyud. On the walls around the
upper structure were the Four Principal Buddhas and the masters who maintained
the monastic tradition, On both sides of the door were Bonpo religious protectors,
both male and female. In the front hall were murals of the eight dPal mgon chen po
146



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
brgyad, the Four Great Kings and the local deity IHa dbang dgra'dul.
This monastery followed the Bru tradition in its activities as exactly as that of
sMan ri Monastery: in the 8th month, the ritual of Khro bo, and in the 3rd month that
of Phur pa, finishing with a whole day's dance performance.
In 1912 the Thirty-nine Tribes of Hor came under the control of the Manchu
officials resident in Tibet and then, later, the Tibetan government began to rule over
the tribes. This Tibetan (dGe lugs pa) rule over the region soon had an adverse effect
on the Bonpo monasteries.
Then Sangs rgyas bstan'dzin, a Hor lama, took care of the mKhar dmar Bla
brang residence, sGo ston Nyi ma rgyal mtshan succeeded him. The latter was born
in 1937 at 1Ha thog in De dge, in a family of the skam lineage. He later became
the head of Klu phug Monastery. He reorganized the cemetery in the vicinity of the
monastery by subduing the ground and building a stone mandala there. The place
was the abode of mKha''gro Seng gdong ma and the ground looks like the crooked
knife of a mkha' 'gro ma and the bare hills nearby resemble a woman's breasts.
mKhan chung Grags rnam, the first Hor governor, assigned by the Tibetan
government, appointed the head of Klu phug Monastery as the abbot of thirty-eight
monasteries among the Thirty-nine Tribes by issuing an edict and a seal. This official
position of the abbot is called So brgyad mkhan po.
After that, Thugs rje nyi ma of skam, using his own resources and assisted by
g Yung drung ye shes of Kha btags, made gilt-bronze statues of the deities of gSas
mkhar mchog Inga and sTag la the height of an arrow, and two large reliquary stupas
of bsTan pa rgyal mtshan and Tshe dbang lha rgyal as tall as a two-storey house.
Me'u ston skal bzang rgyal mtshan succeeded sGo ston Nyi ma rgyal mtshan
as the head of the monastery. He was born in 1912 and was recognized as the
reincarnation of his predecessor by Phun tshogs blo gros, the twenty-eighth abbot
of Man ri. In the presence of the abbot he took monastic vows, then ascended the
Monastery. He twice carried out restoration work at mKhar dmar
bla brang, during which he built a new twelve-pillared temple containing religious
objects such as gilt-bronze statues of rNam pa rgyal ba, Gyal ba rgya mtsho and
sMon lam mtha' yas, each of which was as tall as a two-storey house. He paid
visits to the Three Principal Bonpo Monasteries in Central Tibet and distributed, in
accordance with old custom, much of his own wealth among the monks there. He,
moreover, took full ordination in the presence of Nyi ma dbang rgyal, the thirty-first
abbot of sMan ri. At his own monastery he had two copies of the bka' 'gyur made.
When the Bonpo monasteries were persecuted by the garrison, consisting of five
hundred guards, posted in sBra chen by the Tibetan government, he was obliged to
escape for a short period of time; consequently he was unharmed. He died in 1954.
gYung drung rgyal ba of the royal house of the king of Hor succeeded rMe'u
ston skal bzang rgyal mtshan as head of the monastery. He was born in 1936 and
147



was recognized as the rebirth of Sras smyon pa. The latter was regarded as the
reincarnation of g Yung drung bstan pa rgyal mtshan. Yung drung rgyal ba took
monastic vows in the presence of Gyal tshab gYung drung rgyal mtshan of mKhar
sna (No. 7). At the age of five, he entered Klu phug Monastery and then travelled
from one monastery to another. He obtained initiations and teachings from a number
of masters living in Khams and Amdo. In 1956, he took full ordination in the
presence of bs Tan pa blo gros, the ex-abbot of sMan ri. While helping maintain Klu
phug Monastery, he was particularly involved in political affairs of both laity and
clergy
The hierarchical system of the monastery is as follows:
- mkhan po and sprul sku
- phan tshun che mo
- dge rgan, five teachers selected from the four colleges: Ke'u tshang sGron
gsal gling, dga' dan 'bul sde gling, bsTan pa yar dar gling and gSer sde bde
chen gling
-dbu mdzad
- dge bskos
-phyag mdzod
- sphi gnyer
- rgyun giyer
- Ishang dpon
Formerly there were about three hundred monks.
Among the eighty-seven Bonpo monasteries in the Tibet Autonomous Region,
Klu phug Monastery is, at present, one of those that have good facilities such as
assembly hall, temple and other buildings. Its religious objects are in good condition.
A broad range of teachings on study, practice and meditation are taught by the
following individuals: the abbot skal bzang 8-yung drung; rTogs Idan Rag shu; Dri
med g-yung drung (alias Dri med rdo rje), the highly illustrious one who has reached
the age of ninety years; Rag shu kun bzang snying po; sGo rigs Ye shes kun 'byung:
sPa tshang 'Phrin las rgya mtsho; and Zhu gyung drung rang sgrol. Altogether, there
are 130 monks presently living there.
Principal among the religious objects still kept in this monastery is the pair of
statues of Gyal ba 'dus pa in tranquil aspect and dBal gsas mgam pa in wrathful
aspect. They are regarded as rediscoveries of Ma ston 1Ha rgod. As well, there are
numerous other religious objects of great importance: the silver image of gShen lha
'od dkar, rediscovered by Bon zhig Khyung nag; bronze statues of Dran pa nam
mkha' and Pad ma mthong grol, alias Pad ma 'byung gnas, both considered to be
rediscoveries.
The mountain called Nor bu lha rtse, behind the monastery, is regarded as a holy
mountain blessed by Dran pa nam mkha' and his twin sons - Tshe dbang rig 'dzin
148



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
and Pad ma 'byung gnas. The mountain to the right is called Nyi ma lha rtse and the
one to the left is Zla ba lhartse. There are three hills designated as gatekeepers: Phyi
Gung ma, Bar Gyal po brag dmar and Nang bSe ru. There is a cave that is supposed
to be that of Dran pa nam mkha' and a lake called sPyang thang mtsho nag.
There are twelve tantrists: de 'dun grags pa, de slong dBang dga', Ban sal
Blo bzang dpal Idan, Nag ru tshul khrims, sTag rtse bsTan pa dge grags, Nag ru
bsTan 'dzin ye shes, Ba ha bon dkar, g Tsang tsha Tshul khrims bstan rgyal, Khor
bSam gtan tshul khrims, Gyu ne bsTan 'dzin Ihun grub, Hor Tshul khrims nyi ma
and Ba ra bsTan 'dzin Ihun grub. All are, in fact, monks strictly observing their
tantric vows.
The main protective deities of this monastery are as follows: Srid rgyal drel
dmar, Srid rgyal drel nag, Ye shes dbal mo, Bya ra ma gsum, rDzu 'phrul sman bzhi
and Mi bdud 'Byams pa khrag mgo. There are murals of the following deities:
1. gNam sman che mo: a goddess with a blue body, one head and two arms.
Mounted on a sheep, she has the look of great bravery.
2. dGra lha rgyal mo: a goddess with a midnight-blue body, one head and two
arms. She holds a sword in her right hand and a breath-gathering bag in her
left. Dressed in black silk, she is mounted on an iron wolf.
3. Yum sras Ma bdud khro gnyer ma: a goddess with a midnight blue body,
one head and two arms. Holding a club in her right hand and a lasso in her
left, and presenting a frightening appearance, she is mounted on a black
waterfowl,
4. Cam mo lam lha: a goddess with a yellow body, one head and two arms.
She holds a lance and a key in her right hand, and an axe and a gem in her
left. Mounted on a gold bee, she is in a state of ever-lasting stability.
5. gСan lha mig dgu: a three-headed, six-armed deity with a brown body. He
presents his right face as a bird, his left face as a pig and the centre one in a
wrathful state. He is mounted on a nine-headed black-pig.
6. rMa rgyal spom ra: a deity with a white body, one head and two arms. Well
clad in armour and a conch-shell helmet, he holds in his right hand a lance
with a flag fastened to it and in his left hand, a gem. Mounted on a snow lion,
he presents a brave look.
7. bТsan rgod hur pa gsod skyen: a deity with a red body, holding a lance in
his right hand and a lasso in his left. He is mounted on a blue horse with a
blackish lower half.
8. Mag dpon rgyal po yang ne wer: a deity with one head, two arms and a
yellow body. In his right hand he holds a symbolic lance with a flag attached
to it and in his left, a lasso. Mounted on a blue horse with a blackish lower
half, he presents a frightening appearance.
9. Brag btsan A bse rgyal ba: a deity with a red-body, holding a noose made of
149



a snake in his right hand and a big owl in his left. He is mounted on a horse
with a blackish back and whitish feet.
10. Gyal chen Nyi pang sad (also called Nyi ma'i rgyal po): a deity with a
white body. His right hand holding a lance with a flag fastened to it and his
left hand holding a lasso, he is mounted on a white horse with a reddish
back.
11. bТsan rgod Grags pa rgyal mtshan: a deity with a red body, holding in his
right hand a lance with a fiag fastened to it and in his left, the heart of an
enemy. He is mounted on a red male horse.
12. Pho lha gNam thel dkar po: a deity of Hor with a white body and hair tied
up at the top. Dressed in glossy white silk, he is adorned with turquoise,
coral and pearls. He holds a crystal sword in his right hand and in his left,
on which he wears a silver bracelet, he holds a white lasso; his arms are
equipped with white wooden conchs. Mounted on a white horse with a
reddish back, he presents a brave appearance.
13. Gra bla dpa' stod: a deity with a white body, a single head and two arms.
Clad in a leather helmet and golden armour, he holds a sword in his right
hand and a lasso in his left. A tiger, a snow lion, a Garuda and a dragon
hover above his head, and he is mounted on a white horse.
14. Gyal chen Shel khrab 'bar ba: a deity with a white body and wearing a coat
of crystal mail. His right hand is giving a signal of unravelling an enigma,
and the left holds a multi-coloured ice-conch. He is mounted on the best
breed of A mdo horse.
15. Dzam sngon ku be ra: a deity with a midnight blue body. Holding a
golden sword in his right hand and an ichneumon in his left, he displays an
imposing air. He is mounted on a horse with a turquoise mane.
16. Se ru: a deity with a blue body, riding a fish. He terrifies even violent
serpents.
In regard to daily activities of the monastery, they perform the bsang ritual in
the morning and, in the evening, rituals to propitiate the protective deities.
Since the monastery has neither farmland nor livestock, they have to rely on
each household for financial support, so more than one hundred of the monks go out
to give prayer services in villages. In payment, they receive one hundred yuan a day
in the highest paid cases, twenty to fifty in moderate cases, and about ten yuan in the
lowest.
With regard to Klu phug ri khrod, which is an hermitage, it is situated close to
the monastery itself, on the mountain to the south. Its main religious objects are the
relies of gYung Nyi ma rgyal mtshan and sGo Thugs rje nyi ma. At present there are
four monks in the hermitage.
150



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
(32) sPu la Monastery
The monastery is also known as sPu la ri khang dgon. From Hor Bra chen
rdzong, travelling twenty kilometres eastward on the highway, another eight
kilometres northward, and then crossing a big river, we reach sPu la Monastery in Ye
tha xiang. This monastery is situated at the foot of a mountain that is the source of
the river. It was founded by Khyung nag Shes rab rgyal mtshan in 1853.
Shes rab rgyal mtshan's family belonged to one of the four lineages of Khyung:
Khyung dkar, Khyung nag, Khyung ser and Khyung khra. Thog la 'bar of Khyung
dkar, Mu khyung rgyal of Khyung nag, 1Ha khyung rgyal of Khyung ser and Khyung
'phags khra bo of Khyung khra each built a temple near a soul-lake and soul-rock. I
will not take up in detail the process by which they built the temples and spread the
Bon doctrine, but I shall give here an account of the masters of sPu la who belonged
to the lineage of Khyung nag Mu khyung rgyal.
Khyung nag Mu khyung rgyal, who had propagated his doctrine in Zhang
zhung, was invited, together with lHa khyung, to Tibet by the king Pu Ide gung
rgyal. The two helped spread the doctrine of Bon in Tibet. Khyung nag Mu khyung
had two sons, sTag sgra dun gtsug and dPal gyi 'ger sti, who practised the tantric
teachings called sPyi spung. Tag sgra dun gtsug was an accomplished devotee and
did great deeds for sentient beings. His son, gNya' gshen gtsug phud, became a great
teacher in Zhang zhung where he had great influence in both religion and politics.
gNya' gshen gtsug phud's son was Khyung mChog rgyal, whose son was Khyung
rgod. Thus, there was an long unbroken continuing line. In the time of Khyung po
s Tong rgyung, there was an internal conflict that caused him to migrate from the
west to the east.
In this line, there was Khyung po sGom nag and his two sons, Gyer mi nyi
'od and Khyung nag Klu rgyal. Of these two, the latter is said to have founded Sog
gYung drung gling Monastery. From Khyung nag Klu rgyal a line continued as
follows: Mu la ti ro, Khod rtsal hur min, Zla ri a kag, Gu ta ta kra, Hun grub 'phrin
las, (who is said to be the founder of gZu bon Monastery), and Mu ri ha ra, whose
two sons were dPon dge and dPon 'ud. It was these two brothers who were the
leaders of Sog gYung drung gling Monastery when the Mongolian troops of Jungar
began to attack their monastery and destroy it.
After that, Drung mu tshul ming of Khyung came to sPu la kha by way of dKar
shod. He stopped there for the night. During the night he was shot and killed by
accident when there was an archery contest organized by the local chief, gZu pa.
This news reached Khyung nag Sa trig, who took the case to court and obtained the
sPu la kha land as compensation for the killing. Khyung nag Sa trig then became
known as sPu la Lama.
Shes rab rgyal mtshan of Khyung nag then founded sPu la Monastery. It was
destroyed by the Jungar troops, but restored by Khyung Abrla. The latter's son,
151



dBang rgyal lhun grub, is said to have rediscovered a statue of sTon pa gShen rab on
the island in the lake gNam tsho. It is still preserved in the monastery. dBang rgyal
Thun grub's son was A ti mu wer. The latter's son was Ge khod dBang rgyal, who was
regarded as a manifestation of the deity A ti mu wer and is said to have rediscovered
a statue of rNam par rgyal ba, which is also kept in the monastery. Ge khod dBang
rgyal had a son called Khyung A dar. From him the line continued through Bla sgur,
gYung drung tshe mchog, dBang dbang and gYang 'job. In the monastery there was
also the dagger called gNam Icags phur pa, rediscovered by Khyung Rin chen dbang
rgyal, and relics of various sizes produced from the cremation when he died.
When the abbot of Man ri, Nyi ma bstan 'dzin, came to sPu la Monastery, he
bestowed upon it the name dPal gShen bstan gYung drung gling. Following that,
there were masters such as Khyung nag bSod nams g-yung drung and bSod nams
chos rgyal at the monastery. There were about sixty-five tantric practitioners strictly
observing the tantric vows.
The main religious objects, in addition to those mentioned above, were as
follows: three excellent statues of Byams ma; those of Nang chen grags pa and sTag
la, a cubit in height; a small one of Dran pa nam mkha': Gyal ba rgya mtsho, a cubit
in height; two excellent ones of sTon pa gShen rab; and a multi-coloured statue of
Kun tu bzang po. All were made of copper. Besides these, there was a thangka of the
Twelve Deeds and a large thangka made of the silk of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal
mtshan. As for scriptures, there was the Khams chen in four volumes, written in gold,
called "Dzam gling rgyan gcig ("the only gem of the world"). There were also the
following objects: a black stone with a self-risen letter A formed of tricoloured onyx
on it; bone relics the size of a goose egg: four knotted knives made when the spirits
sPyang 'gag were subdued; eight reliquary stupas made of gold, silver and copper;
eight cubit-height stupas made of sandalwood and juniper, a maroon coloured
conch; a dragon flint; a horse-whip made of native onyx; a sacred gold horse-saddle;
a serpent made of turquoise; a cannibal demon's right hand made of coral; a maroon
coloured precious stone; and a pair of oboes made of gold. This monastery had this
manifold wealth of religious objects and innumerable treasures.
The range of holy mountains behind the monastery includes g Yung drung
dpung rdzong, sTag la me 'bar, A rngul 'bri ri phyung mo and Pha bong bon ri. It is
said that if one performs circumambulation around Mount Pha bong bon ri it is equal
to doing that once around Kong po bon ri. There are footprints of sTon pa gShen rab
and the four scholarly men. Near the lake mTsho chen ma there is the footprint of
Srid pa rgyal mo drel dmar.
The monastery closely follows the sMan ri tradition. The monks assemble
sixty times a year amounting to seventy-nine days. There are fifty monks, including
the abbot gYung drung rgyal mtshan, skal bzang dbang grags, who oversees the
observation of the fasting ceremony, Rin chen blo gros, the disciplinarian, and
152



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
bsTan pa tshul khrims, the chanting conductor. Among the fifty monks there are the
teachers who have twenty-two monk students.
(33) Ma rong Monastery
The monastery's full name is rMa rong dgon g Yung drung Iha brag gling. From
sPu la Monastery, driving twenty-five kilometres further eastward on the highway
leads us to the lower terrace of rMa rong village. To reach Ma rong Monastery, a
further thirteen kilometres must be driven northward on a terribly bad road, which
can take an hour.
In 1390 dBra khyung Nam mkharin chen built a hut in this place for the
purpose of retreat. It then gradually developed into a monastery
This monastery is found near Mount su rgyal gangs bzang and is one of four
monasteries situated at the four cardinal points of the mountain. It is also known
as Nang mdun dgon. sPu rgyal is a holy mountain for both Bonpo and Buddhists.
Its being a holy site was prophesied by early sages and this is particularly clear
in the guide written by g Ter ston bDe chen gling pa rMa rong Monastery was
later enlarged by Drung mu, who had overcome many obstacles brought on by
the local deities. He tells this story in his "Dzam bu yig chung, as well as in the
communication he had with the local deity, entitled 'Dzam bu lha rtse.
Khyung po kun bzang grags pa and his brother were living in dByis stod,
where they were involved in a dispute with Rong po dgon, a dGe lugs pa monastery
Intending to migrate to Western Tibet, they arrived at the residence of the rMa rong
local chief. A rgya, the chief of rMa rong, was a patron of Kun bzang grags pa.
A rgya and his people requested Kun bzang grags pa to be the head of rMa rong
Monastery. However, Kun bzang grags pa and his brother declined the offer. They
continued their journey. A rgya then informed Khri rgyal rje chen, the twelfth king of
Hor. The king told Kun bzang grags pa that not only could he not leave for Western
Tibet, he should settle down in the pastureland where the king had his herd of mdzo
animals, as well as look after rMa rong Monastery. From that point the monastery
had to perform religious services for the benefit of the king and, in return, the king
issued an edict in recognition of the monastery.
Khyung po gYung drung rnam dag, the son of Khyung po Kun bzang gragspa,
had a temple called rNam rgyal lha khang built in the monastery, containing many
religious objects. He made majestic masks of the religious protectors such as the Ma
(Srid pa rgyal mo), the bDud (Mi bdu 'byams pa khrag mgo) and the bТsan (Brag
btsan A bse rgyal ba). The mask of the bТsan is regarded as special since no dust
ever stays on it.
of the three sons of gYung drung ram dag, the eldest, Nam mkha' rgyal po,
made many copies of scriptures for the monastery. He had two sons, Nyi ma 'jig rten
and dBang po. Nyi ma 'jig rten is said to have been chivalrous. His son was Khyung
153



po g-yung dpal. When Khyung po g-yung dpal died, it is said that where his corpse
was buried the tree stag ma grew from his tongue. His son was g Yung drung phun
tshogs, whose sons were Blo Idan grags pa and Tshe dbang grags pa. Tshe dbang
grags pa brought considerable development to the monastery. After that, Blo Idan
grags pa was involved in a dispute with bSod nams bkra shis, the brother of the Ma
rong chief, so Blo Idan grags pa strongly wished to leave for Western Tibet, but was
prevented by the king of Hor. The king told him that unless he would live in Ma
rong he would have to live in either Khrom tshang or sGong ru. So Blo Idan grags
pa stayed in Khrom tshang for several years, during which rMa rong Monastery
declined a little. After that, bSod nams dbang 'dus, the son of the rMa rong chief,
requested the lama to come back to the monastery, but the lama was unwilling,
Through the mediation of a representative of the king and the Be hu of the Sog
tribe, the lama was reinstalled as the head of the monastery. He undertook as much
restoration as he could. He lived to one hundred years of age. His son is Khyung po
Bla rgan gYung dga', who is presently at the monastery. There were nine lamas in
the line of succession, from Kun bzang grags pa to Blo ldan grags pa. The king of
Hor recognized a number of them by issuing offical letters to them.
The monastery's main religious objects, all of which were of great sublimity,
were as follows: a large white conch whose sound travelled very far, rediscovered
by gTer ston gYung drung grags pa of Zhu; the horn of a female deer, which was the
private property of Khyung A sha barang grol; the reliquary stupa of Khyung po
Nang chen gragspa, called gSer 'od "bar ba or rTen bya 'phur ma; and a statue of
Dzam bha lha made of A ya sbug ge, rediscovered in dKyis 'khor thang in rTa shod
by rTa shod Bu mo pad ma mtsho. In the temple of the monastery there were the
following religious objects: statues of sTon pa gShen rab, rNam par rgyal ba, Byams
ma, Khro bo gtso mchog, sTag la, Dran pa nam mkha' and his twin sons Tshe dbang
rig 'dzin and Padma 'byung gnas; a number of gold-painted thangkas; and scriptures
including the bka 'gyur and bKa'brten.
This monastery is surrounded by the holy mountains su rgyal, 'Dzam bu, Jag
pa, g Ye rtse and lHa brag.
There are six lamas in the monastery: Gyal mtshan nor bu, dGe dbang, g Yang
rgyal, bSam 'phel nor bu, dGa''degs and Sri thar, who all belong to the Khyung po
lineage. The disciplinarian is sTag skyabs, and Nor dga' is the chanting conductor.
Of the forty inmates presently at this monastery, three are proper monks and the rest
are lay religious practitioners.
There are four annual rituals, held in different seasons: the rNam rgyal ritual in
summer and autumn, and the rituals of sTag la, Phur pa and Byams ma in winter and
spring, each lasting twenty days. The monastery is regarded as a branch of Klu phug
Monastery (No.31).
As for the main source of income, the monks have to depend on their families
154



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu. Chamdo and Ngari regions
for support. People usually offer from ten to fifteen yuan for the occasional religious
services the monks perform in villages. As there are only three proper monks, the
temple of the monastery and its contents are in a pitiful condition.
(34) Khrom tshang Monastery
The monastery's full name is Khrom tshang dgon g Yung drung kun grags gling.
From the lower terrace of rMa rong village, travelling thirteen kilometres eastward
on the highway, one reaches Khrom tshang Monastery lying on the hillside to the
north. This monastery is in a beautiful environment.
In the Seventh Rab byung (1387-1446) Kun mkhyen Ye shes snying po, who
was a disciple of mNyam med gShes rab rgyal mtshan and supported by Nyi ma legs
chen, chief of Khrom, founded the monastery Dar lung dgon in Khrom. It was then
maintained by a series of lamas of the Khrom family and others:
1. Khrom sras bs Tan pa lhun grub
2. Khrom sprul gYung drung mthong grol
3. Kun mkhyen Sangs rgyas grags pa
4. Ngags 'chang bkra shis rgyal mtshan
5. Khrom tshang bsTan 'dzin nor bu
6. dBang chen dge legs
The monastery was a well developed centre, with its temples full of religious
objects and scriptures including the bka' gur and hKa'brten. However, it was
completely destroyed by the evil Jungar troops of Mongolia and remained a
monastery only in name. After that, the lamas of the Khrom family lived in tents
made of the yak hair or in hermitages.
After a long period of misfortune, Shes rab g-yung drung, the Twenty-fifth
abbot of sMan ri Monastery (No.1), paid a visit to the region. He instructed the
Khrom family to rebuild the monastery and restore its tradition. After examining
the place, he decided upon a site for it, and in 1845 rNam rgyal grags pa, the chief
of Khrom and Blo mgar began to rebuild the monastery as they had promised in the
presence of the abbot. It was called g Yung drung kun grags gling. The head of the
monastery was de bzang g Yung drung dbang rgyal. A series of six heads of the
monastery followed him, down to Yon tan rgya mtsho. In 1998 there were fifty-two
inmates, both monks and tantric practitioners.
The principal religious objects of this monastery were two reliquary stupas
and statues of rNam par rgyal ba, sMon lam mtha' yas, Gyal ba 'dus pa, Kun snang
khyab pa, sTon pa of the nine ages, Khro bo gtso mchog, dBal gsas, IHa rgod, sTag
la and the eight Lo pan gshen. Other religious objects were a large conch, relics of
sTon pa gShen rab; a dextral conch made of the teeth of Hun grub grags pa, and an
image of Kun bzang that had risen from the central energy channel of dGe bzang
Bon chung. Besides these, there was a set of the bka' 'gyur and eighty volumes of
155



works on Tantra
As for the annual activities, the inmates assemble five times a year:
1. In the 4th Tibetan month Me tog mchod pa and rNam rgyal stong mchod
were celebrated for ten days. During these ceremonies 11,000 butter lamps
were lit.
2. In the 6th month there was the observation of the smyung gnas fasting for
eleven days and 20,000 butter lamps were lit.
3. In the 7th month the ritual of A dkar bum sgrub was performed for ten days
with 50,000 butter lamp being lit.
4. In the 9th month the Zhi khro ritual was performed for eleven days.
5. In the 11th month Ma rgyud was performed for eight days.
Because the monastery customarily offered a huge number of butter lamps,
people called the monastery the Butter Lamp monastery (Mar me'i dgon pa). As
for the funds for the above ceremonies, the monastery had about six hundred 'bri
(female yak) which had to be taken care of and whose number had to be kept at six
hundred by a certain number of the local villagers.
The personnel of the monastery were as follows:
- dbu bla
- dbu mdzad
- dge bskos
- gnyer pa
- spyi gso
All held their positions for a certain number of years.
At present there are four head lamas: gYung drung yon ten rgya mtsho, bSod
nams g-yung drung, Ye shes dbang Idan and Shes rab blo gros. The disciplinarian is
Tshul khrims dbang rgyal, and the chanting conductor is sTobs Idan ye shes. There
are one hundred and six monks.
The holy mountains around the monastery are Gangs risPu rgyal, IDe'u chen
and rTsaritsa gsar. The holy lakes are Srid rgyal bla mtsho, sPu rgyal bla mtsho and
Rum mtshorgan. The protective deities are Srid rgyal drel nag, Mi bdud 'Byams pa
khrag mgo, A bse and Gyal po Shel khrab can; these four are called Ma bdud btsan
rgyal bzhi.
As daily activities, they perform the bsang ritual in the morning and chant the
Zhi ba a gsal. When we visited the monastery, they were in the course of the rNam
rgyal stong mchod ceremony. Of the rituals performed in the monastery, the four
important ones are based on the gYung drung klong rgyas, rNam rgyal, Byams ma
mdo lugs and rNam dag pad ma klong yangs.
This monastery is a branch of Man ri. Apart from sixty-two yaks, it has
no material means of food production or income generation. Income to cover all
expenses comes from performing religious services in villages, for which they are
156



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngarl regions
paid from two to fifteen yuan.
Driving 190 kilometres south-eastward on the highway, one reaches sTeng chen
rdzong. As three high mountain passes must be crossed on the way, it takes eight and
a half hours.
157



158
mTsho-sngon
SNye-rong County
Mounty
tha-bejdsumido
bug
tichung phug
Sog-chung
dMar-ru
sBra
sBra-chen
Gra real
Lung-dur
-shans
Pure
Yechu
sTeng-chen
Acroni khrad
sGur-khng
Pula Ri-khan
Lha shes Ye-tha-thang
County
le
@
'Bri-ru County
Ya-na-mido
*
County Seat
Township Seat
Administrative Village
Monastery
County Border
River
Road
Footpath
1/960.000
Sog County



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
(26) sPa tshang Monastery, Plate 1
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)
(26) sPa tshang Monastery, Plate 2 Stupa bkra shis 'od 'bar in
the monastery
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)
159



(27) Lung dkar Monastery
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)
(30) Phur nag Monastery
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)
160



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
(31) Klu phug Monastery
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)
22
(32) sPu la Monastery
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)
161



(33) Ma rong Monastery
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)
(34) Khrom Ishang Monastery, Plate 1
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)
162



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
(34) Khrom tshang Monastery, Plate 2 Amonk at the monastery
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)
163



sTeng chen rdzong
Teng chen rdzong is in Khyung po, north-eastern Tibet. It covers an area of
11,562 square kilometres, of which 110,000 mu is farmland, 11,500 mu pastureland
and over 35,000 mu natural forest. It has a population of about 53,000 and consists
of sixteen xiang and sixty-five village councils.
During the period of the Mongol empire and the Ming dynasty of China, sTeng
chen formed a part of the Sog sde territory. In 1647, it came under the direct control
of the Manchu government. In 1751, it came to be ruled by the Manchu officials
resident in Tibet and in 1916, control was handed over to the Tibetan government. In
1959 sTeng chen rdzong was established and absorbed into Chab mdo region. At one
point in history it was called Sum pa glang gi gyim shod, a territory of Zhang zhung
sgo pa, which was one of the three provinces of Zhang zhung called sGo, Phug and
Bar.
The story of the Khyung lineage begins with three brothers: IHa lung rgyal,
Khyung Thog la 'bar, and dMu khyung rgyal. Around the 10th century, Shes rab
rgyal mtshan, of the dMu khyung lineage, migrated to Sum pa glang. As the Khyung
lineage prospered there, the place came to be known as Khyung po.
(35) sTeng chen Monastery
The monastery's full name is sTeng chen dgon g Yung drung bstan rgyas gling.
s Teng chen Monastery comes under the administration of the municipality of sTeng
chen and is situated on the hillside to the west of the rdzong. It was founded in 1061
by Khyung dbus Shes rab rgyal mtshan.
The story of the Khyung lineage is told as follows: A long time ago, a big
Garuda (khyung) flew into a flower garden and there it produced three crystal-like
eggs, from each of which appeared a very beautiful boy. The eldest was called Ha
khyung, the second Thog la 'bar and the youngest dMu khyung rgyal. The latter
had two sons and a daughter, Tag sgra dun gtsug, dPal gyi gir ti and Khyung bza'
Ye shes mtsho rgyal. The daughter, Khyung bza', married Lig mi rgyal, the king of
Zhang zhung, Her elder brother, sTag sgra dun gtsug, flourished in Teng chen. He
had a son called Gyer nam zur rtse, who had two sons, Tong rgyung rin mo and
Tag la skyes. The former had three sons, Khyung sgom mu langs, Khyung 'phags
khra mo and Khyung sder sngon mo. Khyung sgom mu langs's son was Khu byug,
and his three sons were sTag pa, Zur dkar ba and mDo bkra ba. Tag pa's son was
Myes tshab, and he had four sons, sTon pa 'bar, Dam pa Khyung sgom (alias Shes
rab sgom), dBen pa ma lugs (alias sTon lug), and Dam pa Khyung dbus (alias Dad
pa rgyal mtshan). sTon pa 'bar's son was sTon thar, and he had six sons, sTon sras,
Shes rab rgyal mtshan, sTon mnyan Dam pa bang bkra, dPon dge, dPon dbus and
sTon 'bum. The mother of these six was a Gya lady, so they came to be known as
"The Six Gya tsha Brothers" (rGya tsha spun drug). Of the six brothers, Khyung
164



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
dbus Shes rab rgyal mtshan was guided by a prophecy as follows:
"The one who holds the lineage of dBra dkar Khyung po
Must go to mDo khams smad.
The doctrine rises and falls like the sun and the moon,
Even if they fall tonight, they would shine tomorrow.
At the bottom of Sum glang lies rNgu rdzong,
In front of the six magnificent fortresses of crystal.
sTeng chen is situated like the gold fish in a lake,
There is the site for a seat of the Khyung family.
Now go towards that site.
The river of knowledge will wind there,
And the flag of the Khyung lineage will be stable there."
When Khyung dbus arrived in sTeng chen there was a Chinese man there called
gTsug gtor nyi ma 'brug grags (hereafter, Nyi ma 'brug grags). He was a man both
powerful and learned. He realized that the time had come and that his was a suitable
place to welcome Khyung dbus.
At that time, Khyung dbus was travelling in the places called Khri, rDo, rMa
and La. Nyi ma 'brug grags constructed a throne at Khyung khri thang in Ma and
gave a reception for the lama. Then the lama was invited to go to a fortress called
Khams gsum dbang 'dus. From there he proceeded to sTeng chen, which he thought
corresponded to the description in the prophecy. The lama first founded two colleges
called Kun khyab gling and bs Tan rgyas gling. The first one was for practising
meditation according to Sutra and the second according to Tantra bsTan rgyas gling
produced a series of eminent monks and Kun khyab gling had tantric practitioners
such as Tha yud wer zhi and the eighteen masters in the Do khung line, who were all
tantrists with long locks.
Nyi ma 'brug grags then offered his adherence to Khyung dbus by telling him
"I have my own Chinese culture in China.
I must return to my own country,
I offer you this seat of mine as your abode.
And this large field for which I paid a bowlful of gold,
As a seat for yourself, king of Khyung.
The plateau up there,
Is the place where I play the gold dice.
Make it your royal seat, you, the king.
Below the junction of the three gSer ru valleys,
Above the confluence of the two rivers,
This is the land I, the old China man, bought
Make it your royal seat, you, the king.
The red rock, which is like a fortress of fire (down there),
165



Is like a Garuda lying in its nest.
Make it your royal seat, you, the king.
It is there where you should build your fortress and palace..."
And he added,
"The spring of water in rDza dkar so ma,
Is the place for your horse to drink.
All this is given to you, please accept them."
Khyung dbus replied: "I am simply a monk who has abandoned the family life,
so I would not know how to manage a fortress and be a leader of a community. If
you mean to give your land and fortress to the Khyung family, my brother's sons A
brla and Nang chen grags pa are at Khyung lung in Zhang zhung. I hope you will be
able to send two messengers with a present from me to go to Khyung lung.
Then Khyung dbus, as a sign of assurance, gave a dagger with a white haft to
the messengers dispatched by Nyi ma 'brug grags. They called on Khyung A brla,
offered the present and told him why they came to see him. Khyung A brla consented
to come to sTeng chen. He, with the two messengers, travelled by the southern road.
They happily arrived in the land of Khyung po.
Then Khyung dbus and Nyi ma 'brug grags met Khyung A brla. Nyi ma 'brug
grags, having given all the land to Khyung A brla, went back to China accompanied
by his own servants, Khyung dbus and all the people saw him off. Khyung dbus
passed away on the shore of the river Ngul chu after exhibiting immense miraculous
signs of his spiritual accomplishment.
Later Nang chen grags pa paid a visit to China and had an audience with
the emperor. Upon returning to sTeng chen, he fixed his residence at Teng chen
itself. Thereafter, sTeng chen's spiritual and temporal laws became very famous.
A brla continued working for the monastery and exhibited signs of spiritual
accomplishment. He finally died at the age of sixty-two. He had many religious
objects of body, speech and mind made.
One of A brla's four wives, 'Dan bza', had three sons, Khyung zhig Ye rgyal ba
dBang rgyal grub and Byang nang pa Byang shes. Ye rgyal ba was an eminent monk.
He practised meditation on Khro bo and Phur pa. Kindling his divine power, he
reinforced his deeds for religious beings. He died at seventy. A brla's son bSod nams
rgyal mtshan by the lady of Rong was a very learned man. He possessed awe-inspiring
dignity, convincing speech and foresight, and his reputation spread. He passed away
when he was eighty-two. Drung chen Nam mkha'rgyal mtshan, another son of A
brla by Rong mo za, was a man with a broad knowledge of Bonpo scriptures. With
the great power and skill obtained from constant meditation on Srid rgyal drel dmar,
in particular, he laboured for sentient beings. At the age of seventy-two, he died in
Teng chen. From here the offspring of A brla were succeeded as the head of the
monastery by a series of masters:
166



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
1. Rin chen rgyal mtshan dar
2. gYung drung rgyal mtshan
3. Rin chen rgyal mtshan
4. bsTan pa'i rgyal mtshan
5. Ye shes rgyal mtshan
6. IHun grub bsod nams dbang rgyal
7. dBang gi rgyal mtshan
8. Yid bzhin rgyal ba
9. Gyal ba don grub
10. Khyung po Blo gros rgyal mtshan
11. Blo Idan snying po (b.1360)
12. Khyung chen Yon tan rin chen
13. Khyung dkar
14. Khyung po A 'je
15. Khyung po rNam rgyal
16. sPyang Be zhu Blo bzang
17. sk yang 'phags Tshe dbang bstan rgyal
Blo Idan snying po, the eleventh, was born of the dBra clan in the lower part
of Khyung po. He received the Oral Tradition, which he wrote down, filling about
fifty-four volumes, including the mDo Dri med gzi brjid. He is said to have had a
five-storey temple built, called b ra shis 'od 'bar. It had statues of deities of the
forty-five vehicles, as well as the Khams chen nag phran ma written in gold. He died
at forty-seven.
sKyang 'phags Tshe dbang bstan rgyal, the seventeenth, studied at gYung
drung gling Monastery (No.2) and obtained the degree of dge bshes there. Having
thoroughly mastered dozens of subjects, he received completely perfect teachings
of texts and instructions from Lama Gyal mtshan in sTeng chen. At that time, g Ter
ston bDe chen gling pa arrived in sTeng chen. He visited the place called g Ter sgrom
kha and prophesied that there would be a monastery there. Since Tshe dbang bstan
rgyal had been given the very same prophecy by skyabs mgon Zla ba rgyal mtshan,
Tshe dbang bstan rgyal fulfilled the prophecies of the two masters by uniting the two
establishments, gYung drung bstan rgyal gling the monastery of Khyung dkar
lineage holders in the Upper sTeng chen - and the one called Kun khyab gling -
which had been the abode of eighteen series of Khyung tantric practitioners into
one and moving them to gTer sgrom kha in 1862.
The new monastery was large with a number of monks. It had over four
hundred households to support it. Moreover, he had over a hundred temples built, of
various sizes. These establishments followed a strict monastic tradition; assemblies
were to be held fifteen times a year. The monastery had many important visitors, so
it became known all over Tibet.
167



Then, in sTeng chen Monastery, there was the accomplished scholar gYung
grags pa (g Yung drung Tshul khrims dbang grags), who had the whole ba' gyur
and bKa'brten copied to the best quality and made an excellent catalogue of the
collection. After gYung grags pa, Khyung sprul Tshe dbang g-yung drung followed
as the head of the monastery in 1913. During this time, China and Tibet were at war
with each other which caused the monastery to be burnt down. However, Khyung
ser sga sprul Tshe dbang g-yung drung took the initiative to rebuild it. A large and
splendid temple was built, containing many religious objects. At that time, bstan
pa, having obtained the degree of dge bshes in metaphysics in gYung drung gling,
returned to his native monastery. When Nyi ma dbang rgyal, the Thirty-first abbot of
sManri Monastery (No. 1), came to this monastery, the abbot appointed bs Tan pa as
head of the monastery, mKhan po bsTan pa had many religious objects made and did
great deeds for sentient beings.
Before 1959, there were about 180 monks in Teng chen Monastery. At present
there are sixty-one monks, led by the following: the abbot, Gya mtsho nor bu, who
is thirty-three years old in 1998, the chanting conductors, 'Chi med g-yung drung
and bsTan pa tshul khrims; and the disciplinarians, bSod nams bkra shis and sNying
rje bstan 'dzin. There are, in fact, no more than fourteen who reside permanently in
the monastery.
As daily activities, in the morning the monks recite the rtsa rlung prayer. Then
they perform the bsang purification ritual and the water offering based on the bDud
rtsi chu rgyun and the risis 'go bdun pa.
Other rituals that the monks perform on different occasions are based on the
texts Mon lam mtha'yas, 'Dul chog (during the summer retreat), Ma tri, rNam rgyal
and mKha'klong gsang mdos. They also perform rituals for wrathful deities, gShed
dmar, Khro bo and the propitiation of the religious protectors.
The mountain behind the monastery is called Brag dmar ri 'dus, the abode of
the local deity Rin chen 'bar ba, and at its left are those called gZi yar sku, Mar sku
and Gong rgyal. In front of the monastery is the holy mountain known as Ri itse
drug.
The monks' main source of income is religious services in the neighbouring
villages of Ye tha, which have a population of more than 3,200 farmers and nomads,
in over 500 households. For these services the people customarily pay the monks
from five to twenty yuan a day.
(36) sTeng chen Hermitage
This is a hermitage that lies to the east of sTeng chen Monastery, less than a
stone's throw away.
The hermitage has a large temple of magnificent design. The main religious
objects are the reliquary stupa of sMon lam rgyal mtshan at the centre, another
168



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu. Chamdo and Ngari regions
reliquary stupa of Me ston Nyi ma rgyal mtshan to the right and that of Tshul khrims
rgyal mtshan to the left. There is also an old thangka of the Twelve Deeds of sTon pa
gShen rab.
Before 1959, there were about fifty monks in this hermitage. Presently there
are two lamas, lHun grub rgya mtsho and Yon tan rgya mtsho, and the chanting
conductor, bkra shis dbang 'dus. It is considered to be a branch of dGyes ri
Monastery in Kong po.
With regard to the main daily activities, in the moming the monks perform the
bsang ritual and the water offering; at midday they recite the mantra of the tutelary
deities, and in the evening, they chant the bka skyong,
Every year, in the 4th Tibetan month, from the 23rd to the 30th day, the monks
perform the Cho ga bcu gnyis ritual. From the 5th month to the end of the 6th month,
the ritual of rNam rgyal is performed. In the 9th month, from the 21st to the 30th
day, they perform the dgu gtor rite based on deities, sometimes Yi dam Dran pa drag
po and other times the goddess Srid pa rgyal mo.
(37) Ko bo Monastery
Ko bo Monastery is under the administration of the sTeng chen villages. It is
about nine kilometres from the rdzong. It lies on a small hill west of the rdzong and
access to it is difficult.
This monastery was founded by Ko bo Ye shes rgyal mtshan in 1408. It is below
the sacred mountain - the abode of the local deity 'Jag rgyal smug po - which is
on the highland between the rivers Ngul chu and Dza chu in Khams.
The line of masters of the monastery is as follows:
1. Ko bo Ye shes rgyal mtshan
2. Zla grags Rin chen rgyal mtshan
3. Zla grags Rin chen dpal bzang
4. Zla grags Nyi ma 'od zer
5. Zla grags Tshul khrims dbang rgyal
6. Ha Rinpoche
7. Zla grags Rin chen phun tshogs
Main Religious Activities
1. In the 1st Tibetan month, from the 3rd day, annual activities begin with the
commemoration of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan. The monks perform
the ceremony based on the Klong rgyas, as well as chanting the Bla ma
mchod pa and the Shogs 'don. The ritual cycle of Phur pa is performed
while two monks perform that of Ge khod separately.
2. In the 2nd month, on the 24th day, the commemoration of Zla grags is
celebrated with the ceremony based on the rNam dag and Klong rgyas. On
169



the 27th day there is a recitation of the 'Tshogs 'don. The monks practise
silent reading of the Khro bo and the Ma tri rin chen sgron ma. On the same
occasion they make offerings to the klu spirits.
3. In the 5th month, on the 29th day, the summer ritual (dbyar sgrub) begins.
There is a ritual of A dkar and a performance of the De brgyad bzlog mdos.
Besides these, the bsKang 'bum is chanted. In the gNas brtan lha khang, two
monks chant the gNas brtan bcu drug, a rediscovery of Sangs rgyas gling pa.
The dbyar sgrub is adjourned on the 6th day of the 6th month.
4. In the 6th month, on the 7th and 8th days, there are religious dances. On the
9th day, all the laity and clerics come, making the circumambulation called
'bum bskor. The zhi khro and gsol kha rituals are performed during the day,
the bka skyong in the evening and the bsKangs 'bum during the night.
5. During the Summer retreat (dbyar gnas) there is a recitation of Sutra, such as
the mDo dri med.
6. In the 10th month, on the 23rd day, the ritual cycle of Khro bo is performed
according to the local tradition, as well as the ceremony of the Yah sras
tshogs 'khor. The chanting of the bsKangs 'bum by two monks takes place
separately. On the 29th day, there is a religious dance and the gtor rgyag
ceremony. On the 30th day, the gathering is adjourned.
As there are many great and complete murals in the assembly hall and at the
porch of Ko bo Monastery, I shall give here the names of the main deities and some
remarks concerning their iconography.
The four great local deities (gnyan chen sde bzhi):
1. Ma chen sPom ra: a deity riding on a white horse
2. Thang Iha Yar bzhur: a deity riding on a red horse
3. Ti se: a deity riding on a snow lion
4. Yar lha Sham po: a deity riding on a dragon
The local deities of the holy mountains surrounding Ko bo Monastery:
1. Mug po ri btsun (alias Brag btsan thog rgod 'bar ma): a goddess with one
head, two arms and a red body. She holds a white conch in her right hand and
a gem in her left. Wearing a black hat on her head, she is mounted on a black
horse.
2. Rinchen 'bar ba, the proprietor of Mount Rin chen 'bar ba: a deity with a
red body, one head and two arms. Mounted on a black horse, he exhibits a
terrifying air.
3. 'Ga'rgyal Rinchen spungs: a deity with a white body, one head and two
arms. He holds a lance with a flag fastened to it in his right hand and a gem
in his left. Mounted on a blue horse, he has an air of bravery.
170



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
4. sPen ne ri bkra: a deity with a white body, one head and two arms. Dressed
in a king's garment, he holds a gem in his right hand and a lance with a flag
fastened to it in his left. He is mounted on a light-bay stallion.
5. Jo mo g-yu rtse: a goddess with a white body, one head and two arms. She
holds a lance with a flag fastened to it in her right hand and a vase in her left.
Mounted on an antelope, she has a peaceful appearance.
6. Ri dmar dBu lha btsan rgod: a deity with one head, two arms and a conch-like
white body. He holds a lance with a flag fastened to it in his right hand and a
gem in his left. Clad in a king's garment, he rides a red horse.
7. dMag doon rTa rgod 'bar ba: a deity with a white body, one head and two
arms. His right hand is clenched in a fist and in his left hand he holds a gem.
Standing on a blazing fire, he shows extreme bravery.
8. Tag lo kha yan: a goddess with a yellow body, one head and two arms. She
holds a sword in her right hand and a gem in her left. Mounted on a tigress,
she is in an extreme rage.
9. Dzong dmar: a deity with a red body, one head and two arms. He holds a
lance with a flag fastened to it in his right hand and a lasso in his left. Riding
a reddish-brown horse, he is in a rage.
10. Grogs rdis Nor skyong dpal Idan: a deity with a white body, one head and
two arms. He holds a vase in his right hand and a gem in his left. Clad in a
nomad's garment, he sits peacefully on a cushion.
11. Rag pa g-yu rtse: a deity with a blue body, one head and two arms. He holds
a lance with a flag fastened to it in his right hand and a gem in his left.
Riding a light-bay stallion, he exhibits an air of bravery.
12. Tag thus bon mtshan: a deity with a blue body, one head and two arms. He
clenches his right hand while holding a vase in his left.
13. Tag thus bon rgan: a deity with a white body, one head and two arms. He
holds his hands in the manner of a meditating monk.
14. rTa sgo: a deity with a white body, one head and two arms. He holds a
drum in his right hand and a flat gold bell in his left. Riding a divine yak, he
exhibits an air of dignity.
15. Gangs rgyal: a deity with a white body and plaited hair. He has one head
and two hands. His right hand holds a lance with a flag fastened to it and the
other holds a gem. He is mounted on a light-bay stallion.
There are also murals of the thirteen mGur lha:
1. gNyan rje Gong sngon, mounted on a red Garuda
2. gTsang Iha Bye yug, on a white horse
3. Srog lha Gangs dkar, on a yellow gander
4. Gyog chen sDong ra, on a divine white yak



5. 'Brong nam Yang rtse, on a blue buffalo
6. Dung lha Byang rtse, on a red horse
7. ICog lha Tshal rtse, on a blue dragon
8. IHa ri gYu rtse, on a yellow deer
9. sPom ra Nag po, on a black mule
10. 'Gyu chen IDong khram, on a red mule
11. dByig chen Ra mgam, on a white horse
12. Baru Ser glang, on a white ox
13. 'Bri chen sDong ra, on a red horse
The twelve br Tan ma goddesses, the guardians of the Bon religion
1. Kong btsun De mo, mounted on a tigress
2. Gangs dkar Sha med, on a yellow gander
3. Ma ting "Phrul mo, on a white horse
4. skyi mthing Ya ma, on a sorrel yak
5. Ma btsun 'Brog chen, on a blue ox
6. Mari Rab khyams, on a blue horse
7. IHa ri Ya ma, on a light-bay horse
8. sKyi mthing Nag mo, on a blue deer
9. Gangs kyi gyu sgron, on a blue parrot
10. Ka ga Ser mo, on an antelope (Hodgson's)
11. Kha rag Khyung btsun, on a black mule
12. Da' la bTsun mo, on a deer
Ko bo Monastery has, moreover, a magnificent mural of 'Ol mo lung ring.
People of different countries call it by different names: bDe ba can by the people
of U rgyan, Mi 'gyur g-yung drung can by the people of Shar gling, dBang bsgyur
"khor lo can by the people of Byang gling, Me tog bkod pa can by the people of Nub
gling, and Yid bzhin bkod pa can by the people of 'Dzam gling.
Further, it was named Sham bha la by the Indian people, Mu khyud gter gyi
gling by the Chinese people, dBang Idan 'khor lo gling by the people of Za hor, Gar
ma gar shom spro by the people of Yu gur, 'Gyur med 'od ma tshal by the people
of Bru sha, Kha la g-yu gshog by the people of Kha che, dPag bsam ljon pa'i gling
by the people of Li bal, Nub byang rtag gzigs khyim gyi yul by the people of Zhang
zhung, Nub phyogs 'Ol mo lung ring or 'Od mo gling by the people of Tibet, Tag
gzigs ga sho nor gyi gling by the people of Mon yul, and dMu yul 'phyo ba gling by
the people of 'Jang.
At present there are two lamas in this monastery, Zla grags Rin chen phun
tshogs, who is fifty-eight, and Bla chung mkhyen rab rgya mtsho, who is twenty-two
in 1998. There are two abbots, de legs tshul khrims and rNam rgyal gtsug phud.
There are more than eighty monks. In the vicinity of the monastery there are over
three hundred households. The population of this area is about 3,500.
172



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
The main source of income for the monks is the religious services they perform
in villages. The lamas of high rank are customarily paid from fifty to one hundred
yuan a day and the common monks from ten to twenty yuan a day.
The location and murals of this monastery possess special qualities that
distinguish it from other Bonpo monasteries. This monastery is now undergoing
significant restoration and enlargement.
(38) Ka legs gYung drung gling Monastery
Ka legs dgon gYung drung gling is under the administration of the sTeng chen
villages. From sTeng chen rdzong, travelling about twelve kilometres westward on
the highway, we reach the village of Ra khrom. After crossing a small bridge, a walk
of more than half an hour in a south-westerly direction leads us to the monastery.
Situated on a hill and surrounded by a number of holy mountains, it lies to the east of
the Four Great Sacred Places of Tibet, south of the Thang Iha range, on the highland
between the rivers Ngul chu and rDza chu, and near Teng chen Monastery (No.35).
It was the place where sPrul sku Blo Idan snying po received the mDo Dri med gzi
brjid as an oral tradition and wrote it down.
The monastery was first supported by benefactors gSas sar Nam mka' g-yung
drung, the owner of the land, 'Be ru bon srung and sTag rtsa Gyal mtshan. The Shel
masters played an important role in the monastery. The origin of the Shel lineage is
as follows: long ago in China, there was a man called Kun dga' 'od 'phro. He lived
amidst flowers in an ocean that emitted lights. He miraculously produced a white
crystal egg from which a little man appeared. He had turquoise hair and a white
chin-tuft; he was dressed in white silk and was holding a lotus. He was found by the
king of China, who called him Zing ba mthu chen. He became a prelate in the court
and came to have the name Legs tang mang po. Sam gtan rgyal mtshan, one of his
descendants, migrated to Tibet, where he subdued many gods and demons. He was
followed by Khro bo rgyal mtshan and Zhig chung Nam mkha' mtha' bral.
In 1454, Yag snya bSod nams rgyal mtshan founded the monastery at gYang
ra brag rtsar. He named the monastery Ka legs gYung drung gling. He raised funds
for the commemoration of the great master mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan
and made sure that the rituals he established in the monastery closely followed the
teachings of the master. There were only seven monks, including the lama Tshe
dbang rgyal mtshan of rDzogs mda' and Tshul khrims. There was a complete set of
religious objects and implements for making offerings, such as the gandi, a drum, a
stone gong and a conch. There was also the tradition of studying the tshad ma logic.
In 1564, reasons for moving the monastery to a new place arose. The old site
was small and unsafe. So, in the time of Hun grub rgya mtsho, a discussion was held
among all the laity and clergy and it was agreed that the monastery should be moved
to Ka bzos sribs. It was therefore rebuilt and the religious objects of body, speech
173



and mind were installed. Celebrations and the study of the ishad ma logic were
re-established. There were about twenty-five monks at that time and the monastery
became known even among the people of Amdo and Gyal rong.
There was a series of masters as the head of the monastery:
1. 'Gro mgon bsTan pa 'brug grags
2. Hun grub bzhi
3. gYung drung mi zhig rdo rje
4. Yid bzhin rgyal ba tshul khrims
5. Sod nams ye shes
6. Tshul khrims rgyal mtshan
7. Zla ba grags
8. Phun tshogs rgyal mtshan
9. bsTan 'dzin grags pa
10. Nyi ma bstan rgyal
11. gYung drung rgyal mtshan
However, in 1914, the Tibetan troops led by the commander Ta nag (who were
of dGe lugs pa obedience), came to the area and they began to murder many of the
local people. They also completely burned the monastery. Phun tshogs bstan'dzin
grags pa (1888-1954) and his three disciples, Nyi ma grags pa, bsTan pa'i rgyal
mtshan and g Yung drung rgyal ba, could no longer live there. They left for Hor
where there were benefactors of the Bon religion.
The teacher Phun tshogs bstan'dzin grags pa was a capable physician. He was
able to cure illnesses of man and animal, and prevent epidemics.
At that time, there was, in sTeng chen, the famous governor-general of Hor,
Grags pa ram rgyal. He assigned A drung to the restoration of the monastery
and sent him to Hor in order to bring back the above-mentioned monks. The
governor-general ordered the chief of dar ru and his people to provide labour, as
well as to transport the timber that was needed.
In 1914, Phun tshogs bstan'dzin grags pa himself laid the foundation of the
main hall. He maintained the monastic tradition of sMan ri as was established by
mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan. He also established the study of the five minor
and five major sciences, the summer and winter festivals for fifteen days each and
the dgu gtor rite based on Khro bo and Phur pa, as well as the chanting of the bka'
skyong.
There were two gilt-bronze stupas in the form of g Yung drung bkod legs and
a statue of Nam rgyal as tall as a two-storey house. He also had new copies of the
bka' 'gyur and bka'brten made and obtained new offering implements, as well as
having thangka made. New monk quarters were built. At that time, there were more
than seventy monks in the monastery.
174



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
A reliquary gilt-bronze stupa of Phun tshogs bstan'dzin grags pa (1888-1954)
as tall as a two-storey house was made.
A prayer for a quick birth of his reincarnation was offered, in consequence
of which his reincarnation was born in 1956. In the process of searching for the
reincarnation, Ka legs Monastery made offerings of twelve thousand sacrificial
cakes (tshogs) to the tutelary deity Phur pa and to the protective deities. It was
known that the reincarnation himself said, "I am going to Ka legs", and showed
many miraculous signs, which were actually heard by the attendant monks. The
father of the reincarnation, who was called Tshang stobs rgyal mtshan, belonged to
the lineage in which Me ston Shes rab 'od zer in Yar "brog was born and the mother
belonged to the lineage of Zhig po. At that time there were about seventy monks in
the monastery. Among them were Rin chen tshul khrims, bsTan pa rgyal mtshan, Ye
shes dbang Idan and bZod pa mthar phyin, who were all very learned, having studied
logic and Sanskrit, as well as being accomplished in meditation according to the Oral
Tradition of Zhang zhung.
In short, this monastery has experienced rises and falls in the course of its
own history, but it had the capacity to produce a series of eminent monks who were
able to uphold the Bon doctrine and it is one of the oldest and important Bonpo
monasteries.
The monastery is surrounded by the following sacred sites: Sa yi brag ri sgor
mo, where the mDo Dri med gzi brjid was written down by Blo Idan snying po; Sa
sho mda', where there is the self-risen Ma tri mantra and swastika; bDe chen Iha
ri gnam rdzong; Chu na ma, and the holy mountain Dong rdzong smug po mched
brgyad, regarded as the site blessed by Dran pa nam mkha' and his son Tshe dbang
rig 'dzin. There is a place called gYang ra nang, which was the previous site of the
monastery
Before 1959, there were seventy monks in the monastery. At present there
are sixty-two, including the lama Tshe dbang stobs rgyal. Rituals are performed
according to the old custom, and all the religious objects, murals and the like in the
assembly hall are kept in reasonably good condition
(39) Mon rgyal bla brang
This is a residence of an important lineage and is under the administration of
the sTeng chen villages. It is located four kilometres to the south of the rdzong. It
was established in 1842 by Nam mkha' dbang. Before 1959, there were seven monks
in the residence. At present there are no more than seven monks and a lama. It is
very limited in scale, and in poor condition in every respect.
(40) Nag ru Monastery
The monastery is usually known as Nag ru dgon Sam gtan gling.
175



From s Teng chen rdzong, travelling three kilometres eastward on the highway,
turning right, then southward to cross a bridge and travelling another five kilometres,
we reach lHa mthong village, which lies at the foot of a mountain. It takes an hour
on foot to reach the monastery from the village, climbing up the mountain behind the
monastery. There is another route that leads to it from its front side.
Nag ru Monastery was founded in 1751 by Li shu stag ring. The present lamas
are Pad ma kun legs and g Yung drung grags pa. Before 1959, there were 105 monks
in the monastery. At present there are forty.
The successive heads of the monastery were as follows:
1. mTha' zhu bDud 'dul sprul sku
2. bZod pa
3. Pad "byung
4. Tag dbang
5. Grags sdis
6. gYung drung grags pa
7. Pad ma kun legs
The main religious object of this monastery was the gilt-bronze statue of Li shu
stag ring. There were also statues of the four deities Srid rgyal, bТsan and bDud. The
monastery obviously followed the tradition of sManri Monastery (No.1).
The monastery is surrounded by the following sacred sites: The mountain
behind the monastery is called Dzong gseb, whose proprietor is Ba tha btsan. There
are caves regarded as those of Dran pa nam mkha', sTag la me 'bar and gShen gSang
ba 'dus pa, and footprints of a hawk, a falcon and a wolf.
As daily activities, in the morning the monks recite the 'Tshogs 'don and
perform the bsang ritual, at midday the ritual texts of dBal gsas, and in the evening
those of Byams ma and sTag la.
The monastery performs the following annual services:
1. In the 1st Tibetan month, from the 1st to the 3rd day, they recite the Klong
rgyas.
2. In the 4th month, from the 13th to the 16th, they recite the bDe shegs bsdus
pa.
3. In the 5th month, from the 26th to the 29th day, there is the commemoration
of an abbot.
4. In the 9th month, from the 22nd to the 29th day, they perform the dgu gtor
rite.
For the main source of income, the monks and lamas must go out to perform
religious services in villages, which comes to no more than ten yuan every four days.
This monastery has fallen into decay. At present the only religious objects are
176



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
two masks and two drums, one big and one small.
(41) Zhe nang Monastery
The monastery's full name is Zhe nang dgon gYung drung dpal ri.
From sTeng chen rdzong, Zhe nang Monastery is reached by travelling three
kilometres eastward on the highway and another eight kilometres along the waterway
on the left. It is located to the west of the river Zhe zhung, in front of the mountain
Gangs chen dbang po. It is a place of beauty and interest, surrounded by glorious
forest-covered mountains, and the harmonious singing of birds is heard.
This monastery was founded in 1735 by Bru zhig Yon tan rgya mtsho. It was the
seat of the Khyung sprul series. Later it was maintained by the hermits g Yung dga'
Rinpoche and Nal 'byor bZod pa Rinpoche. The latter undertook its renovation
The lineage of Khyung sprul starts with the sage kun dkar 'Od ldan and then
later continued as follows:
1. g Yu sgra snying po
2. Shes rab blo Idan
3. Grags pa rgyal mtshan
4. IHun grub rgyal mtshan
5. gYung drung phun tshogs
6. gYung drung bstan dzin phun tshogs
7. Gangs rgyal who was four years old in 1998
Around the monastery are the following sacred mountains: Mount Gangs chen
dbang po, regarded as the abode of Dran pa nam mkha' and his twin sons Tshe dbang
rig 'dzin and Pad ma 'byung gnas, is situated at the back of the monastery; to its
right is Mount gYag se, to the left, Ra mdung, and in front, sPen ne ri bkra. There are
also the two lakes of sPas thang mtsho, the large and the small
The monastery has the following religious objects: a relic of sTon pa gShen rab
as big as a hen's egg, a conch made of his teeth and a tooth of bZod pa Rinpoche.
Before 1959, there were 130 monks in the monastery. At present, there is the lama
*Chi med rig 'dzin and more than eighty monks.
(42) Zhu tshang Monastery
Zhu tshang Monastery is in INga stod village, sPa zla xiang. The xiang lies
seventy-six kilometres west of sTeng chen rdzong. To reach INga stod village, a
further ten kilometres of difficult driving northward is required.
This monastery was founded by bs Tan 'dzin grags pa in 1567. Before 1959,
there were sixty monks in the monastery. At present there are sixty-one. There used
to be three lamas, but now only one. The condition of this monastery is reasonably
good in many respects, like the assembly hall, the temple and the religious objects.
The main source of income is, as with other Bonpo monasteries, the performance of
177



religious services in villages.
(43) Ri dmar Monastery
Ridmar Monastery is in Wang khog village, Khri rdo xiang. From the rdzong,
after travelling sixty-five kilometres westward on the highway, another two-hours
eastward and towards the mountain pass is required to reach Wa khog village.
This monastery was founded by Shel rgya Shel zhig dbu dkar in 1573. Before
1959, there were eighty monks in the monastery. At present there are no more than
twenty monks and one lama. The temple and religious objects of this monastery
are in a somewhat poor condition. They have no source of income other than the
religious services the monks perform in villages.
(44) sGang ru Monastery
The monastery is known as sGang ru dgon Dar rgyas. It is situated to the east of
Srib mda village in Khri rdo xiang. From the rdzong to Khri rdo xiang is a distance
of sixty-five kilometres along the main road From there, it is five kilometres further
to Srib mda' village.
This monastery was founded by Rin chen bstan'dzin in 1310. Before 1959,
there were eighty-seven monks in the monastery. At present there are fifty-six monks
and one lama.
(45) Be sgo Monastery
Be sgo Monastery is situated in gTam stod village, in g Tam stod xiang, which
lies to the south of sTeng chen rdzong, It is a distance of forty-five kilometres from
the rdzong to the xiang. As there is no road, the monastery is extremely difficult to
reach
This monastery was founded by dBal 'bar stag slag in 1590. Before 1959, there
were seventy monks in the monastery and now there are twenty-eight.
(46) Gya sgo Monastery
Gya sgo Monastery stands within gTam stod village, gTam stod xiang. From
the rdzong, g Tam stod xiang is reached by travelling forty-five kilometres northward,
which, however, is very difficult because of the absence of a road to the xiang.
This monastery was founded by bSam gtan tshul khrims in 1869. Before 1959,
there were twenty monks in the monastery. At present there are fifty monks and one
lama. The condition of the assembly hall, temple and religious objects remains good.
Rituals and services have been preserved as they used to be.
(47) gNam steng Monastery
The seat of gNam steng Monastery is a place called gZi, which lies to the
178



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
south-west of gTam stod village in gTam stod xiang, gTam stod xiang is reached
by travelling forty-five kilometres southward from the rdzong. To reach gzi, it is
necessary to travel ten more kilometres in a south-westerly direction from gTam stod
village, which is very difficult because there is no road.
This monastery was founded by SMon lam 'od zer in 1496. Before 1959, there
were twenty-one monks in the monastery. At present there are thirteen monks and
one lama. The assembly hall, temple and religious objects of this monastery are in
poor condition.
(48) Mu g-yad Monastery
dMu g-yad Monastery is located to the south-east of Nu khug village in Tam
stod xiang. It is a distance of forty-five kilometres from the rdzong to gTam stod
xiang. From the xiang, the monastery is reached by travelling four kilometres in a
south-easterly direction. As there is no road to this xiang, it is very difficult to reach
the monastery.
This monastery was founded by Kun dga' rgyal mtshan in 1910. Before
1959, there were forty-five monks in the monastery. At present it is taken care of
by seventeen monks and one lama, who maintain the time-honoured customs of
Bonpo rituals and services. The assembly hall, temple and religious objects are
in reasonably good condition. The monks have no source of income other than
performing religious services in villages and support from each household.
(49) Yang rdzong Monastery
The location of Bya ze Yang rdzong Monastery is cast of Kha thang village in
a place called Bya ze which is in Ser tsha xiang. From the rdzong, it is reached by
driving forty-five kilometres in a north-westerly direction.
This is a magnificent monastery. It was founded by Khyung po 'Bum rgyal
grags pa in 1413. sPrul sku Blo ldan snying po came to this monastery and he is said
to have been aided by the local deities in his efforts to improve the monastery. By
miraculous means, he constructed the magnificently-designed main hall on top of the
high craggy hill. It had many sacred objects.
Before 1959, there were 350 monks in the monastery. Now there are seventy
monks and three lamas.
(50) Tsha ne Hermitage
This hermitage is located to the east of Ru pha village in Ser tsha xiang. From
sTeng chen rdzong, Ser tsha xiang is reached by driving forty-five kilometres in
a north-westerly direction. Travelling another three kilometres eastward from the
xiang one reaches Ru pha village.
The hermitage was established by Shes rab phun tsbogs in 1838. Before 1959,
179



there were ten hermits in the hermitage; now there are five.
(51) Ma rdzong Monastery
Ma rdzong Monastery is situated to the west of 'Bu tshab village in Ser tsha
xiang. It is a distance of forty-five kilometres from the rdzong to Ser tsha xiang,
From there to 'Bu tshab village is a further five kilometres. As there is a road, it is
reasonably convenient for cars to reach the village.
This monastery was founded by g Yung rgyal in 1774. Before 1959, there were
forty-five monks in the monastery. At present there are twenty-one monks and one
lama.
The temple and religious objects of the monastery look reasonably good.
Similar to other Bonpo monasteries, the monks have no means of earning a living
other than performing religious services in villages and gathering support from their
own parents and relatives.
(52) Phug leb Monastery
Phug leb Monastery is situated to the west of "Bu tshab village in Ser tsha
xiang. Ser tsha xiang is forty-five kilometres north-west of the rdzong. 'Bu tshab
village is five kilometres from the xiang. As there is a road, it is a relatively
convenient trip.
This monastery was founded by Khyung po 'Bum chen in 1413. Before 1959,
there was one lama and two hundred monks in the monastery. At present there are
twenty-one monks and one lama. This monastery, being one of the centres of the
Khyung lineage, follows the old school of Bonpo tradition. The assembly hall,
temple and monks' cells are elegantly made on a grand scale, and it has a great
number of statues of ston pa gShen rab, Dran pa nam mkha', sTag la me 'bar and
rNam rgyal. There are many books of excellent quality
Like all other Khyung po monasteries, rituals and services are held many times
a year. Various aspects of this monastery, such as the temple and religious objects,
are kept in relatively good condition.
(53) Kha spungs Nunnery
Kha spungs Nunnery is located in Kha spungs village in Ga ngad xiang. From
sTeng chen rdzong, travelling more than eighty kilometres westward on the main
road and then more than ten kilometres further northward, one reaches Kha spungs
village, in the south-east part of which lies Kha spungs Nunnery.
The nunnery was founded by Tshul khrims dbang mo in 1928. Before 1959,
there was the head nun and twenty-two other nuns in the nunnery. At present there
are twenty. The assembly hall, temple and the religious objects of the nunnery are
in fairly good condition. The activities, such as annual religious services, have
180



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
been successively preserved. As the nunnery has no property, for their living the
nuns must receive support from their own families and earn money giving religious
services in villages.
(54) Mar khu Monastery
Mar khu Monastery is located to the west of Ngas pa village in Ga ngad xiang,
sTeng chen rdzong. From the rdzong, Ga ngad xiang is reached by travelling more
than eighty kilometres westward on the main road and then more than ten kilometres
northward. Ngas pa village is a further five kilometres from the xiang and the
monastery lies to the west of the village.
This monastery was established by lHun grub rgyal mtshan in 1691. Before
1959, there were thirty-nine monks in the monastery; now there are twenty-five. The
condition of the assembly hall, temple and religious objects is reasonably good. The
monks perform the bsang ritual every morning and other rituals every evening. Their
source of income is the same as other small Bonpo monasteries.
(55) rTse drug Monastery
Tse drug Monastery is situated in Sa sgang xiang in sTeng chen rdzong.
Travelling thirty kilometres in a south-easterly direction from the rdzong, one
reaches the foot of the hill on which rTse drug Monastery is located. It is a two
hour's traverse on horseback from the west side of the hill up to rTse drug Monastery
at the top.
All around the monastery is a land of great beauty where birds, big cuckoos and
small 'jon mo, are heard singing. Along the mountains and gorges stretching right
and left, there are many legends woven around Ge sar, the King of Gling, and Seng
Icam 'brug mo, his wife. There are also numerous tales of the local deities.
The monastery was founded by Blo ldan snying po in 1383. It is one of the
places blessed by innumerable sages and is often called Shel le rdzong drug. Its
formal name is Shel brag gShen bstan Dri med gling. It is regarded as one of the five
holy places in the world:
"Ri bo rtse Inga, abode of the mkha' 'gro in China,
rTsa ra'i tsha khang, abode of the mkhagro in India,
Me tog spungs mdzes, abode of the mkha' 'gro in Orgyan,
Bho di, abode of the mkha' 'gro in Shambhala,
Shel le rdzong drug, abode of the mkha' gro in Tibet..."
"The hill at the back looks like an elephant lying,
With a gem held in its mouth.
The hill to the right looks like the rising moon,
With little stars in the sky.
The hill to the left looks like a snow lion leaping,



With turquoise mane on its chin.
The mountain range looks like white silk spread..."
The monastery is surrounded by many marvelous signs and self-grown objects.
Beneath the heap of boulders in front, there is a footprint of sTon pa gShen rab the
length of a cubit, which is still visited by devotees. At the back of the monastery is
a self-grown statue of Gyal ba rgya mtsho, a miraculous foot print of sTon pa 'Chi
med gtsug phud and the self-grown letters A and Ma as evidence of teachings of
Buddha having been spread. On a rock regarded as the throne of Bla chen Dran pa
nam mkha' there is a self-grown swastika and a self-grown letter A. To the left of the
craggy hill is a self-grown statue of the mkha' gro Seng gdong ma. In front of the
monastery there is a cemetery called Dul khrod bsil ba gling. Beside it is a large rock
resembling a human lying on his back; it is regarded as the seat the mkha' 'gro Seng
gdong ma.
On the surface of a boulder is a verse that Sangs rgyas gling pa wrote with his
fingers, as if he were drawing in mud:
"All the virtuous work that I have accomplished
with my body, speech and mind in sincerity,
I share it with the sentient beings of the three realms,
May it aid them all to purify all their misdeeds, and
Rapidly obtain Buddhahood, endowed with three perfect bodies!"
On the surface of another boulder within an arrow's range, there are the
self-risen letters Ya, Ra, Kha, Sru and A, which can actually be seen. On the surface
of the high crag Bon ri, there are clear footprints and letters, around which is a
self-grown statue of Khro bo gTso mchog mkha' 'gyings and a statue and a mandala
of Sangs rgyas sman bla. Moreover, in rTa rgyas rdzong, there is a cave of Gyim tsha
rma chung with a spring in the middle of it, a self-grown conch on the peak of Shel
brag dri med dngos dga', and caves of Dran pa nam mkha', Tshe dbang rig 'dzin,
Padma "byung gnas and Blo ldan snying po.
Blo Idan snying po, founder of the monastery, was of the dBra clan. He was
born in 1360 in Khyung po. From childhood he naturally displayed cleverness and
dexterousness unlike other children. He quickly mastered writing and reading. He
was such a miraculous one that he inspired awe and respect in the minds of the
people at the first sight of him. He met the scholar Rin chen blo gros, and in his
presence took monastic vows and was given the name dBra btsun Nam mkha' rin
chen. He became an eminent scholar versed in Sutra, Tantra and Mind,
In a vision, he received an oral transmission, which he wrote down, filling
fifty-five volumes. They are about the Bon doctrine and the deeds of ston pa gShen
rab, such as the following works on Sutra: Dri med gzi brjid in twelve volumes,
mishan mdo in six volumes, IHun po brtsegs mdo, bkra shis dal 'bar khab and Ma
tri rin chen sgron ma. There were also works on Tantra: dBal gsas rtsod zlog, Phur
182



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
pa spyi 'dul gshed dmar, gSang mchog rig pa khu byug and Thabu chen mkha'rgyud.
He wrote other works on Dran pa nam mkha', the local deities of the place, as well
as various religious songs (mgur) and instructions (zhal gdams).
He had a number of statues and stupas made, as well as a copy of the Khams
chen in gold. He practised meditation in other sacred places, such as Bya ze yang
rdzong.
His close disciples were sGo rigs Gyal mtshan 'od zer and 'Be tsha Grags
rgyal. Other disciples were Khyung po Yon rin, sTogs ldan Nam mkha' rin chen of
A ba, Giya ra bSam gtan rgyal mtshan, Gya po Rin chen 'od zer rgyal mtshan, Gru
zhig Nam mkha'od zer and La dpyil rGyal mtshan 'od zer. Having completed these
deeds, Blo Idan snying po passed away.
The reincarnation of Blo ldan snying po was Mi shig rdo rje, who produced
fifteen volumes of writings on Bon doctrines, including the sNyan brgyud zhi khro
dgongs 'dus.
The Third Blo ldan snying po was Sangs rgyas gling pa, who greatly developed
rTse drug Monastery. His benefactors were the chiefs of Khyung dkar, Khyung nag
and Khyung ser in the Khyung po region. He was invited to go to Gyal rong by
the king of dGe bshes. In Gyal rong he gave teachings to the people. When he was
about to return to rTse drug Monastery, he was invited to the hall rNam rgyal khang
bzang in the palace of the dGe bshe king. The king gave him the following gifts: an
image of Gyal bargya mtsho that uttered words by itself, a pair of dragon-figured
cymbals and a bronze gong named Khro chen dgu 'pharma. The king also called
on thirty young men to be ordained and become monks of rTse drug Monastery
The king of Brag steng gave Sangs rgyas gling pa the following gifts: thirty pairs of
cymbals and thirty pairs of little flat bells of the Bon tradition. The king of Rab brtan
gave him a large pair of cymbals named I Ha mo rang grags and another called Srid
pa rang grags, a large flat bell, canopies called rTa rgyugs ma and Khyung Inga ma,
and the curtain called Seng thod ma. The Chinese emperors gave him large plaques
(pan), on which there were words in Chinese characters written in gold.
Sangs rgyal gling pa, who was venerated by all, wrote many works, which are
in two categories. First, the Oral Traditions he received, which are as follows: gNas
brtan bcu drug, gSang mchog rol pa, Dran pa bdud 'dul, Gu ru zhi drag, Tshe dbang
8-yung drung, Gur khang, sTag la, and rDzong phrang le'u gum pa. Second, the
texts he rediscovered, which are as follows: Tshe sgrub rdo rje'i go khrab, Bla ma
dgongs 'dus, bka'thang kun snang gsal sgron and Che mchog dran pa drag po.
There were also sacred objects that he rediscovered: a blue statue of Pad ma 'od
"bar, a skull of the Brahman; a figure of the mkha' 'gro Thugs rje kun sgrol and her
belongings, such as her flat bell, dagger and vajra; as well as the tsha isha image that
belonged to Vairocana,
Sangs rgyas gling pa, the great treasure-rediscoverer and savior of beings,
183



having carried out the keeping, defending and spreading of the doctrines of Bon, and
having done great deeds for sentient beings, finally passed away.
Sangs rgyas gling pa's successors at the monastery were:
1. dMu btsun Tshul khrims rgyal mtshan
2. Mi pham gro ba?imgon po
3. Zhu sprul bSod nams dbang rgyal
4. Me ston Nyi ma rgyal mtshan
5. Pad ma gar gyi dbang phyug
6. Nyan rgyud dPal 'bar stag slag
7. bSod nams blo gros dbang gi rgyal po
8. Khyung dkar Yon tan
Me ston Nyi ma rgyal mtshan, the fourth in the line, was regarded as the
embodiment of Dran pa nam mkha'. He gave up eating food, yet lived on at rTse
drug for a long time. He established the hermitage of Gyim shod yang dben mthong
grol near the monastery,
In 1926, Nyag gter gSang sngags gling pa was invited to the monastery. He
rediscovered various texts from the cave called Seng ge g-yu rtse and he established
in the monastery the "religious dance of the 10th day" and the sman sgrub ceremony.
On this occasion there were over five hundred monks and nuns, a larger number of
pilgrims, plus the local people all gathered together. The number of Bonpo pilgrims
and spectators rose to nearly one hundred thousand.
In 1934, Kun grol hum chen 'Gro 'dul gling pa was invited to the monastery.
On this occasion, when he gave teachings concerning the Zhi khro, there were people
from Hor, Khyung po and Tshaba rong; about 700 monks and nuns came to listen.
The monastery also invited Khyung nag Tshul khrims phun tshogs - a disciple
of 'Ja'lus pa Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan - who gave extensive teachings there
and initiated the making of copies of the bka' 'gyur and bka' brten, consisting of
five hundred volumes, and paintings of more than fifty thangka of the life of Sangs
rgyas gling pa; as well, he initiated the restoration of temples. His disciples were
Phun tshogs dbang rgyal, Tshul khrims dar rgyas, bSod nams blo gros dbang gi rgyal
po (the fifth rebirth of Sangs rgyas gling pa), Gar dbang rNam rgyal gYung drung
rgyal mtshan and Tshul khrims ram rgyal.
gYung drung bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan and Tshul khrims mam rgyal are presently
resident in the monastery. They have set up a new monastic school there, in which
they have established the practice of meditation based on the Che mchog dran pa
drag po, and the performance of the shogs 'khor ceremony on the 10th, 15th and
22nd day of every month. There are seven permanent resident monks.
184



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
The monastery has many invaluable religious objects:
In the gSer gdung khang: a solid gold reliquary stupa of Sangs rgyas gling pa in
the form of g Yung drung bkod legs as tall as the ceiling, which contains his remains;
a reliquary stupa of Sangs gling Pad ma gar dbang; a statue of Tshe dpag med made
of a mixture of medicine and clay; a statue of Sangs gling nga 'dra ma carved by
'Gro mgon; and murals depicting the life stories of Sangs rgyas gling pa.
In the bka' 'gyur khang: a statue of sMon lam mkha' yas as tall as a two-storey
house, its back curtain adorned with the assembled deities of Cho ga bcu gnyis; and
murals depicting the twelve deeds of ston pa gShen rab.
In the bedroom: a bronze image of Guru Rinpoche; images of him in eight
forms, made of dzi gim (red gold); and murals of Mi shig rdo rje and the Bonpo
deities, including sMra ba'i seng ge, Gu ru Drag dmar and dPal mgon bdun cu.
On the outer walls of the bedroom: murals of the Sixteen Arhats, the thousand
images of sTon pa gShen rab, Guru, Nyi pang sad, the guardian of rTse drug and Me
srung ral gri.
In the 'Tshogs chen lha khang: a life-sized statue of Dus kyi 'khor lo; eight pairs
of stupas; and murals of the Bonpo deities according to the Ma tri rin chen sgron ma
by Blo ldan snying po, Phur pa, gShed dmar and Las gshin nag po chen po.
In the gSeng khang: a gilt-bronze statue of gShen Iha 'od dkar of good quality;
statues of Shes rab smra ba'i seng ge, Dus 'khor, Tshe dpag med and rNam par rgyal
ba, each an arrow's length in height; hundreds more statues of gNas brtan and others;
and murals of the assembled deities of the Che mchog dran pa drag po and of the
three Seng, Ma and gShin.
In the Pod brtsegs kun dga' rwa ba bskang gsol khang: a stuffed image of riyal
chen Shel khrab and the supports of other religious protectors.
In the 'Khor khang: statues of Yum chen Shes rab byams ma and Gyal ba rgya
mtsho, made of a mixture of medicine and clay; murals of the Eight Guru, and three
conch-shell ornaments.
In the upper storey of the gSeng khang: Nor bu me "bar made of gilt-bonze and
a banner of victory.
In the back room of the large assembly hall: a statue of gShen Tha 'od dkar
made of a mixture of medicine and clay, statues of sTon pa Khri gtsug rgyal ba, Ton
pa gShen rab and g Yung drung mthong grol, each of which is as tall as a three-storey
house; 108 stupas and murals of Blo Idan snying po, Mi shig rdo rje, Sangs rgyas
gling pa, Kun grol gragspa, bDe chen gling pa and the deities of Cho ga bcu gnyis.
In the bShad grwa'i 'du khang: a statue of Yum chen Kye ma 'od mtsho and a
life-sized one of 'Ja'lus pa Shar rdza b ra shis rgyal mtshan.
There are also caves of Mu cho ldem drug, Dran pa nam mkha', Tshe dbang rig
'dzin, Pad ma 'byung gnas and Bloldan snying po.
There were six sanctuaries of the religious protectors in the monastery, in each
185



of which lay many statues beyond all value. Among the objects in these sanctuaries
were the following: a word-uttering statue of Gyal ba rgya mtsho made of dzi gim, a
cubit in height, which was rediscovered in Gyal rong by Sangs rgyas gling pa; large
and small conchs made of the teeth of ston pa gShen rab, rediscovered at Pha bong
g-yag ro in the south by Go bde 'phags pa alias dBang Idan gShen sras lha rje.
There were, as well, the following: the statue of Pad ma 'od 'bar, rediscovered
in the dBus phug cave of Bon ri by Sangs rgyas gling pa; a statue of Rig 'dzin Dran
pa bdud 'dul, rediscovered in rTa shod dkyil 'khor thang by Blo Idan snying po; a
small flat bell worn by the mule of the goddess Srid rgyal drel dmar and rediscovered
by gShen chen klu dga'; a statue of Hum chen, the 6th Kun grol; a statue of gShen
Tha 'od dkar rediscovered at Tse drug by 'Gro 'dul gling pa; and a statue of sTon pa
Khri gtsug rgyal ba rediscovered at rTse drug by sPa tshang gter chen. There were
also the rediscoveries by gSang sngags gling pa: a bronze statue of Zhi khro gSang
ba'dus pa, two phur pa daggers and a statue of 'Chi med gtsug phud made of iron.
Later a new development took place in the monastery. Gar dbang Nam rgyal
and his associates began to take an interest in the teachings of Shar rdza bkra
shis rgyal mtshan. They began to unify various meditation establishments in the
monastery and appointed Khyung nag Tshul khrims phun tshogs as the head of the
monastery. Then a new meditation centre was established, where the new head of the
monastery began to give teachings based the "Five mDzod" of Shar rdza bra shis
rgyal mtshan. His disciples were brTson 'grus rgyal mtshan, sMon lam bstan 'dzin,
gYung drung dge legs, skal bzang g-yung drung and Tshul khrims rgyal mtshan.
The successive abbots of the new establishment were as follows:
1. Khyung nag Tshul khrims phun tshogs
2. brTson 'grus rgyal mtshan
3. Mon lam bstan'dzin
4. gTsug phud tshul khrims
5. gTsug phud 'od gsal (d. 1923)
7. g Tsug phud tshul khrims (a second time)
gTsug phud tshul khrims continued giving teachings based the "Five mDzod" of
Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan.
Annual Services and Rituals at present
1. In the 1st Tibetan month there is the commemoration of mNyam med chen
po, based on the Klong rgyas.
2. In the 2nd month, the gDugs dkar cycle is performed.
3. In the 3rd month there is the commemoration of Sangs rgyas gling pa
4. In the 4th month there is the performance of the rituals for offerings of the
sacrificial cake (tshogs) one thousand times to Ma, gShin and Seng.
186



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
5. In the 5th month, with the monks from several monasteries, the ceremony
based on the Bla ma rig 'dzin 'dus pa is held, and on the 10th day, the tshes
bcu ceremony with a religious dance.
6. In the 6th month the summer retreat take place.
7. In the 7th month the ritual based on the Zhi khro dgongs 'dus is performed.
8. In the 8th month there is the performance of the ritual based on the Ma mo
rbod gtong
9. In the 9th month, with the monks from other monasteries, the ritual cycles of
Khro bo and Dran pa drag po are performed.
10. In the 10th month there is the performance of the rite based on the rTa
mgrin ga u dmar nag.
11. In the 11th month the srung zog rite based on the ritual cycle of Phur pa is
performed.
12. In the 12th month there is the performance of the rite based on the ritual
cycle of Guru drag po.
During the months from the 9th to the 12th, all the monks also follow a
programme of meditation based on the rDzogs chen sku gsum rang shar by Shar
rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan. During this course of meditation the monks practise
rtsa lung, glum mo, 'phrul 'khor, lus sbyong, rlung sbyong, chu sbyong, rlung ras,
chu ras, rgyab thur, and bcud len.
Tse drug Monastery had the following branches: Wa dge dgon Phun tshogs
g-yung drung gling, rDa shis Bum steng dgon, Bra kho Dar rgyas dgon, Gyim shod
Yang dben mthong grol ri khrod, Bon dgon gSas gdong g-yung drung gling, Na ba
dgon gYung drung bstan rgyas gling, sBis tho dgon g Yung drung lha steng, Lam
lha dgon g Yung drung gtam brag gling, dByibs dgon gYung drung Ihun po rtse,
rTa 'tshel dgon, Phug la dgon, Ru tha Ngang rdzong dgon and dyes ri dgon, all of
which were deemed to correctly maintain the tradition of rTse drug Monastery.
The storekeeper and the treasurer of the Bla brang were fully responsible for all
the procedure and financial affairs. In the sGrub grwa khang, seven lamas and monks
practised the four stages of the tantric meditation while they learn other subjects.
Likewise, the abbot and teacher gave lessons to more than fifteen monk students, on
the first four of the "Five mDzod" by Shar rdza.
In the sGom grwa khang, twenty lamas and monks, headed by the abbot,
practised the rDzogs chen meditation based on the dByings rig rin po che'i mdzod,
one of the "Five mDzod".
In the Srung ma khang, three monks continuously performed the bskang gso
ritual for the Bonpo religious protectors.
In the 'Khor khang, three persons continuously turned the three wheels of rolled
scripture. Besides those who had responsibility in the monastery, there were other
lamas who had to make visits to the branch monasteries twice a year in order to see
187



if the monastic codes were observed; others appointed monk officials, exchanged
offerings and performed rituals for the people and for the dead. The other duty of
these monastic officials was to collect donations.
This monastery's main sources of revenue were its manors -- brDa shes, Kha
lung, Wa dge, sPra kho, sВa nag and Brang rtswa thang - which produced as much
as 250 khal of seed, and Upper and Lower rTa shod in dKar smad, Kha lung and Wa
dge, from which they received payment for the rituals of rain-bringing and protection
from drought and hail.
The total grain earning of the monastery was: from Bam sting, Bal tho, Shog
Inga, and Chu gzhung. The monastery also received gifts such as rape-oil. When
the year's harvest was bad the monastery lent about 500 'bo of grain to the villages
below the monastery, such as Wa dge, for which it received interest.
In br Da shes and other places, the monastery possessed real estate with animals
for ploughing, seventy or eighty mdzo mo for dairy purposes and about forty horses
and mules for transport.
Two families of herdsmen kept the monastery's 180-plus yaks and 'bri, and one
hundred goats and sheep. In the nomad areas, such as dNgul phug, 'Gis nang, Om
thog kha and brDa ris mda', the monastery had nomadic people called Thab gsos
dud gsum who provided much of the annual expenditure, such as butter for making
butter-lamp offerings.
The material revenue of the abbot and high lamas covered the cost of living for
about forty monks.
As for the great hermits in the caves of Mu cho ldem drug, Dran pa nam
mkha', Tshe dbang rig 'dzin, Pad ma 'byung gnas and Blo ldan snying po, they were
customarily supported by the well-off families, such as the chiefs of dKar stod, Kar
smad, sGar khang, Bya ze, and Nag ru.
Before 1959, there were about five hundred monks in this monastery. At
present there are six lamas, including Gar dbang rNam rgyal, and about 210 monks.
This monastery has an assembly hall with thirty-six pillars, gSer gdung khang, a
meditation hall, a college building and other buildings, all of which are adorned with
excellent interiors. The main religious objects, of immense value, are as follows: the
word-uttering statue of Jo bo nga 'gro, which, having been hidden by many lay and
clerical devotees during the Cultural Revolution, was presented to the monastery, a
cubit-high statue of Kun bzang rGyal ba rgya mtsho made of rdzi gim; a pair of large
and small conchs, which are the transformations of gShen rab's teeth and his melodic
voice; a blue statue of Pad ma 'od 'bar, a statue of gShen tha 'od dkar made of pure
gold; a statue of sTon pa Khri gtsug rgyal ba; a statue of Rig 'dzin Dran pa bdud
'dul; a bronze statue of Phur pa ten cubits high; and a seal of Dran pa nam mkha'.
All of these can still be seen in the monastery.
Annual services and rituals are performed according to the age-old tradition. In
188



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
particular, in 1984, there was the sman sgrub medicine ceremony based on the dBal
phur 'od zer 'khyil ba'i sman sgrub, during which as many as eighteen thousand
lay and clerical devotees from Hor, Shog Inga, Lam lha, Khyung dkar, Khyung
nag, Khyung ser, IHa ru and Bag sre crowded into rTse drug Monastery in order to
receive initiation and the "medicine" distributed at the time, as well as to enjoy the
religious dances. All who gathered there made the festival a great occasion.
(56) Wa dge Monastery
From Teng chen rdzong travelling south-east for forty-three kilometres on the
main road, we reach Sa sgang xiang. Crossing a small bridge on the right, half an
hour's walk eastward leads us to Wa dge Monastery.
This monastery was founded by Blo ldan snying po in 1383 as one of the main
branches of rTse drug Monastery. Before 1959, there were forty-two monks and at
present there are ten. This small monastery is now in poor condition.
(57) Bya chen Monastery
This monastery is situated in the eastern part of g Yam tha village in dMu tha
xiang, on the northern edge of sTeng chen rdzong. As it is 170 kilometres from the
rdzong to dMu tha xiang, it is difficult to reach unless travelling by car.
Bya chen Monastery was founded by g Yung drung rgyal mtshan in 1885.
Before 1959, there were sixty monks. At present there is one lama and twenty-five
monks.
(58) IHa lung Monastery
This monastery is located in dMu tha village, dMu tha xiang, which is on the
northern edge of the rdzong. It is 170 kilometres from the rdzong to the xiang, so it
would be very difficult to travel there without a car.
IHa lung Monastery was founded by gYung drung dbang rgyal in 1636. Before
1959, there were six lamas and fifty-eight monks in the monastery. At present there
is one lama and thirty monks. The monastery is suitably equipped with an assembly
hall, a temple, religious objects and implements for making offerings
(59) gYu mtsho Monastery
The monastery is located to the west of sPyang tha village, Ga tha xiang. From
the rdzong, one reaches Ga tha xiang by travelling 130 kilometres in a north-westerly
direction. This monastery is forty kilometres north of the xiang. As there is no road
between the xiang and the monastery, it is a very difficult trip.
The monastery was founded by Gyal rong bla ma in 1494. Before 1959,
there were ninety-eight monks in the monastery and at present there are thirty.
The monastery is fairly well equipped with an assembly hall, a temple and other
189



buildings. There are religious objects and offering implements appropriate to such an
establishment
(60) Ga shel Monastery
The monastery is in the western part of Shar 'dra village, Ga tha xiang. It is
reached by travelling 130 kilometres in a north-westerly direction from sTeng chen
rdzong, which is an extremely hard journey because there is no road; one must go on
horseback or on foot.
This monastery was founded by Nam mkha' mtha' bral in 1585. Before 1959,
there were four lamas and 145 monks. At present there is one lama and fifty-two
monks. This monastery is counted as one of the rather large Bonpo monasteries
in the northern part of sTeng chen rdzong. It has an assembly hall, a temple, a
meditation hall and other fairly large buildings, inside of which are religious
objects, implements and the like, which are in good condition. Annual services and
the practice of rituals have been, as is the case with the large majority of Bonpo
monasteries, maintained in accordance with the old tradition,
(61) Re ne Monastery
This monastery is situated on a hill on the eastern outskirts of Re ne village,
Zam zhig xiang. It is seventy-five kilometres from the rdzong to the monastery.
The monastery was founded by sNang zhig Zla ba rgyal mtshan in 1704.
Before 1959, there was one lama and 120 monks in the monastery. At present there
is one lama and sixty monks.
This monastery is counted as one of the larger Bonpo monasteries belonging
to sTeng chen rdzong. The buildings include an assembly hall, meditation hall and a
temple, inside of which there are religious objects and implements, all well kept. The
practice of annual ritual services has been, on the whole, maintained as it was before.
The lama and monks must earn their living, as those in other Bonpo monasteries
do, by going out to perform religious services in villages.
(62) Ngang rdzong Monastery
The monastery is in Ru tha village, 'Bo tha xiang. 'Bo tha xiang is seventy-five
kilometres from the rdzong and Ru tha village is thirty kilometres south of the xiang.
It is accessible by car.
This monastery was founded by Rin chen rgyal mtshan in 1941. Although
there were fifty-three monks in the monastery before 1959, there are no more than
fourteen at present. This is a small monastery, with a temple, meditation hall and
religious objects in poor condition.
190



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chardo and Ngari regions
(63) IJong phu Monastery
1Jong phu bon dgon Monastery is located to the east of IJang shod village,
Sa mdo xiang. From the rdzong, the xiang is reached by travelling south-east for
forty-five kilometres on the main road. It is a mere ten kilometres from the xiang to
the monastery, but the trip can be difficult because there is no road.
This monastery was founded by Blo ldan snying po in 1446. There were only
ten monks in the monastery before 1959. This number has increased to fifteen today.
Although this is one of the old Bonpo monasteries established in sTeng chen rdzong
by Blo ldan snying po, it has shown little development over the past five hundred
odd years.
(64) Zla shel Monastery
Zla shel bon dgon Monastery is located in Zla shel village, Sa mdo xiang.
From the rdzong, Sa mdo xiang is reached by travelling forty-five kilometres in a
south-easterly direction on the main road, and the monastery is fifteen kilometres
from the xiang. However, one may find it very difficult to reach because there is no
road from the xiang.
The monastery was founded by Blo Idan snying po in 1446. The number of
monks in the monastery before 1959 was thirty-two, which, today, has increased
to thirty-nine, plus one lama. Although Zla shel bon dgon is also counted as one
of the ancient Bonpo monasteries, the past five hundred odd years have brought it
little prosperity. It is now in a rather poor condition, in every aspect of the monastic
buildings and religious objects.
(65) Bra hor Monastery
sBra hor Monastery is located to the south of sBra hor village, Gyang sngon
xiang. From the rdzong, Gyang sngon xiang is reached by travelling south-east for
sixty-five kilometres on the main road. The road between the xiang and sBra hor
Monastery, which is just one kilometre, is very good.
This monastery was founded by Blo ldan snying po in 1446. Before 1959, there
were fifty-eight monks in the monastery, but now there are only eighteen. Although
this is also one of the old Bonpo monasteries from the latter stage of Bonpo
development, internal and external affairs have prevented it from developing during
the past five hundred odd years, so it is still small.
From Teng chen rdzong, a six-hour drive eastward on the Nag chu-Chab mdo
Highway leads us to Chab mdo district. Then driving another six hours eastward, we
reach 'Jo mda' rdzong. It is an extremely dangerous and difficult trip from Chab mdo
to 'Jo mda' rdzong because we must cross mountain after mountain.
191



192
Thoghang Chu-Ang Mu tha
sBra-chen County
l'dre sam-mdo
m Tsho-sngon
Ngad.pl
Gwa-ngad
y County
©
o
*
---
County Seat
Township Seat
Administrative Village
Monastery
County Border
River
Khri-rdo
he
Ser-sha
stang-
ru
a
Yanga
ng dan
Ri-bo-che Conty
Ba-dan
-
Sog County
Road
sTeng-chene Zhe-gthung
Footpath
1/900,000
ying Cats Shor-la
bangtangling
rse druga
Khalung
(
nastog
Thatet ban-
C
a-mdaa
h eplubo-date
dPal-'bar County
1Ho-rong County



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
(35) Teng chen Monastery
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)
193



(36) sTeng chen Hermitage, A silver pall at the hermitage
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)
194



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
(37) Ko bo Monastery, Plate 1
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)
195



(37) Ko bo Monastery, Plate 2 Zla grags in chen phun tshogs, the head
lama of the monastery
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)
196



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
(38) Ko legs gYung drung gling Monastery
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)
197



(40) Nag ru Monastery
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)
(41) Zhe nang Monastery, Plate 1
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)
198



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
(41) Zhe nang Monastery, Plate 2 Stupas in the monastery
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)
(41) Zhe nang Monastery, Plate 3 Zod pa Rinpoche's tooth
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)
199



200
(55) Tse drug Monastery, Plate 1
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chardo and Ngari regions
(55) Tse drug Monastery, Plate 2 The monastery and its followers' tents
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)
(56) Wa dge Monastery
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)
201



Jo mda'rDzong
Jo mda' rdzong lies in the north-east of Tibet. It covers an area of 13,155
square kilometres, of which 77,080 mu is farmland and 10,823 mu is natural forest.
It has a population of about 58,000. There are 152 local councils, eighteen xiang,
two townships and one city.
'Jo mda' is also called sDe dge 'Jo mda' because the ruler of sDe dge once
governed it. In 1909, the self-governing body of sDe dge was abolished and 'Jo mda
began to have close relations with Sichuan province. In 1959 the people's commune
of 'Jo mda' rdzong was established.
Historically, 'Jo mda' is a place well known for its handicrafts and other skilled
work such as iron-work, silver-smithing and other metal work, as well as wood
carving. It is particularly celebrated as being one of the homes of Tibetan musical
dramas.
At present in the domain of this rdzong there are six Bonpo monasteries to
which many lay and clerical devotees associate themselves. The Sa skya school of
Buddhism also flourishes there. The monastic buildings and religious objects of Bon
and Sa skya monasteries are in good condition in every respect.
(66) sTag gzhi Monastery
s Tag gzhi Monastery is situated near Kha srub village, dBang po steng xiang.
From the rdzong, dBang po steng is reached by driving thirty kilometres northward,
From dBang po steng, the monastery is a whole day's trip further northward on
horseback.
The monastery was founded in 1180. Before 1959, there were five monks in this
monastery. At present there are two lamas, sku gsung blo gsar and Ye shes nyi ma,
and thirty monks. This is one of the earliest Bonpo monasteries of the latter stage of
Bonpo development. However, it is still rather small because of the rise and fall in
the history of the Bon doctrine.
The monastery has fifty statues, including those of sTon pa gShen rab, Dran pa
nam mkha' and sTag la me "bar. It also has about sixty thangka. The main source of
income is, as with other Bonpo monasteries, the performing of religious services in
villages, from which the monks and lamas make their living.
(67) Zha zhi Monastery
Zha zhi Monastery is situated in Khra dge xiang, which is reached by driving
forty kilometres northward from the rdzong. The monastery is a whole day's ride on
horseback from Khra dge.
The monastery was founded in 1409. Before 1959, there were eighty monks and
at present thirty-five. The monastery is one of the old Bonpo monasteries in the Chab
mdo region. It is a rather large monastery, but over the past six hundred years, due
202



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
to grave adversity, both internal and external, it has been unable to develop itself. It
has the look of being very small from outside. As regards religious objects, it has
twenty statues including those of sTon pa gShen rab, gShen Iha 'od dkar, rNam par
rgyal ba and Byams ma, as well as twenty-odd thangka. The monks raise, as a source
of income, sixty-three 'bri and yaks, given by devotees. Besides these, they receive
support from households and go out to perform religious services in villages.
(68) rDis bon Monastery
rDis bon Monastery is located in the vicinity of Ri mda village, Thung phu
xiang. Thung phu xiang is within a stone's throw of the rdzong and Ri mda' village is
seventy kilometres from the xiang. The road between the rdzong and the monastery
is reasonably good. One can drive right up to the monastery.
The monastery was founded in 1600 and is situated on the eastern side of the
mountain Ma gling khrib bya ba. To the south-west of Ma gling khrib bya ba at spa
rdis steng, there is a large hermitage. To the left of the monastery is a holy mountain
called Shugs chen, and in front is a big river called mDo chu, which comes from
mDo gzhung, the upper part of the valley.
In the 17th century, when the Be ri king ruled over the region, the master
Ce tsha mKhar bu of Mi nyag became the prelate of the king. He established a
hermitage on top of the mountain sPa rdis, halfway up the mountain Ma gling khrib
bya ba.
In 1641, the Mongol chief Gu shri Khan (of die lugs pa obedience), leading
his horde, destroyed the monasteries of the bKa' brgyud pa and Bonpo in the area,
including rDis bon Monastery, and overthrew the Be ri king. Later, sTag gzhi bka
bo rgyal and Khram Tshe dbang rgyal po, who were disciples of Ba ya dar 'dzang
and had been hiding themselves when the Mongol horde was about in the region,
rebuilt rDis bon Monastery and it became a fairly large establishment. Later, in Sod
nams dbang Idan's time, there were two important residences (bla brang) of lamas
in the monastery, one was called Tse gzhung and the other Bla gzhung. There was a
series of masters belonging to the Se family:
1. Se zhig Mu la thogs med
2. Se Nam mkha' thogs med
3. Se kho Nam mkhaºdbang phyug
4. Se kho Ra ma mkha' spyod
5. Se sprul Tshe dbang mchog legs
At present, there is a monk called Togs Idan bsTan 'dzin who was sixty-two
years old. In spite of his being in the course of three years' retreat, he was kind
enough to grant us an exceptional audience. This monastery is counted as one of the
large Bonpo monasteries in the Chab mdo region.
Before 1959, there were forty-four monks and at present there are forty-seven.
203



This monastery now has an assembly hall, a temple and a meditation hall (sgrub
khang), all well designed and spacious. There are religious objects such as statues,
scriptures and reliquary stupas.
As for annual services and daily activities, they follow the sMan ri tradition
only. In the morning they say prayers, then they chant the Kun rig, followed by
more prayers. In the evening they perform the gsol kha ritual to the protective
deities, including Srid rgyal drel dmar.
The annual rituals are as follows:
1. In the 1st Tibetan month the ritual of sTag la me 'bar is performed, followed
by a five-day ritual of Phur pa.
2. In the 5th month there are commemorations, the observance of the summer
retreat, and the performance of rituals based on the Klong rgyas and Nam
gyal.
3. In the 9th month there is a performance of the ritual based on the Khro bo
ngo mtshar rgyas pa and the 'cham dance of Khro bo.
(69) sPong Monastery
sPong Monastery is located near Tar grong, sPang ge xiang. The xiang is
reached by driving eighty kilometres northward from the rdzong; from the xiang to
Tar grong takes several hours on horseback. The long distance makes it difficult to
reach the monastery.
The monastery was founded in 1697. Before 1959, there was a lama and
eighty-three monks and at present there are thirty. In spite of its long history, it has
seen little growth due to the rise and fall of Bonpo fortunes. There is only a temple,
an assembly hall and a meditation hall, all very small. Religious objects in its
possession include twenty statues, large and small, including those of gShen Iha 'od
dkar, Dran pa nam mkha' and Yum chen Byams ma, and six thangka. The monastery
depends upon ten yaks and a small number of horses and mules for income. The
monks must make their living, as in other Bonpo monasteries, by obtaining support
from households and by going out to perform religious services in villages.
(70) Bla khri Monastery
Bla khri Monastery is located in the vicinity of Bla khri village, sPang dge
xiang. sPang dge xiang is reached by driving eighty kilometres northward from the
rdzong. Then it is a few hours on horseback from the xiang to the monastery.
The monastery was founded in 1754. Before 1959, there were eighty monks
and at present there are fifty. The head of the monastery is sPrul sku Gyal ba g-yung
drung. Its assembly hall, temple and meditation hall are all fairly large. There are
many religious objects, including about twenty statues, tall and short, of such figures
204



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
as sTon pa Khri gtsug rgyal ba, gShen tha 'od dkar, rNam par rgyal ba, Khro bo,
sTag la me 'bar, Dran pa nam mkha', his son Tshe dbang rig 'dzin and Srid rgyal drel
dmar, twenty-five thangka and scriptures, including the bka''gyur and bKa'brien.
Compared with other Bonpo monasteries in 'Jo mda' rdzong, this monastery
is in better condition in every respect. It has thirty 'bri and yaks, thirteen goats and
sheep, five horses and mules, and a car.
(71) dKar tshang Monastery
dKar tshang Monastery is located near Bla khri village, like Bla khri Monastery,
for whose location, see above.
The monastery was founded in 1696. Before 1959 there were fifteen monks,
but at present no more than ten. Although this is an old monastery with a long
three-hundred-year history, it is still very small. Its religious objects include the
following: seven statues, tall and short, of sTon pa gShen rab and Dran pa nam
mkha'; forty thangka; and several books.
For their source of income, as in other Bonpo monasteries, the monks depend
on the support of households and earn money by performing religious services
among the people in the villages. They have no property apart from eight yaks and
thirteen sheep, given by devotees.
From 'Jo mda'rdzong to Chab mdo, it takes six hours by car. To go up to IHO
rong rdzong, we must drive a further seven hours via Ribo che. On our way, at a
pass near Chab mdo, we were all of a sudden struck by a heavy snowfall, which
caused us difficulty and risks. Between Ri bo che and IHo rong rdzong the road is
fairly good and does not, therefore, present that much difficulty
205



'Ba'-rong
Sichuan
Hoa
rau
Bla-khri
darsha!
Khra-dgon
zha-zhiv
sDe-dge County
s Pang-sgal
Jo mda
County
Tex-gzhi
dBon-po-stod
Do
Ter-stoo-
river
Dzi-shar
Thang nhu
Ke chu
'Jo-mda
river
Chab-mdo County
County Seat
Township Seat
Administrative Village
Monastery
County Border
River
Rond
1/910,000
----
Footpath
206



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu. Chamdo and Ngari regions
(68) Dis bon Monastery
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)
207



IHO rong rdzong
IHo rong rdzong is in the north-east of Tibet. It covers an area of 8,108 square
kilometres, of which 85,000 mu is farmland, nine million mu is pastureland and
1,270,000 mu natural forest. It has a population of about 36,000. There are eleven
xiang and one town.
During the period of the btsan po, it was under the Tibetan imperial government
and later under Mongol rule. Around 1644, the area was incorporated into the land
holdings of Chab mdo Monastery. In 1725, control of the rdzong was transferred to
the government of Tibet. In 1959, the people's commune of Ho rong rdzong was set
up. The rdzong is within the administration of Chab mdo region.
Ho rong is highly productive. It possesses about twenty mineral veins, such as
gold, silver, copper, coal, asbestos and others. It's people are largely semi-nomadic,
and the area is home to a great many animals, such as leopards, bears, wild yaks,
deer, musk deer, otters and other carnivores and herbivores.
(72) Khra rgan Monastery
The formal name of the monastery is Khra dgon g Yung drung kun grags
gling. It is also known as Nyi phug sgrub. It is located in Wasgo xiang, dMarri qu.
From the rdzong, dMar ri qu is reached by travelling twenty kilometres eastward.
Then, driving ninety kilometres in a north-easterly direction, one reaches Khra rgan
Monastery. The monastery was founded in 1999 by Khra chags med bra shis rgyal
mtshan.
Khra chags med was the son of Gling Ra khra rgan po of the royal lineage of
Gling 'Gu zi. During his childhood, Khra chags med lived in Yag yul. At that time
prophecies were made by Ma mchog Srid pa rgyal mo that Khra chags med should
go and preach the Bon doctrine in sacred places in mNga' ris, Western Tibet and
Central Tibet in order to establish places for the practice of meditation.
In accordance with these prophecies, Khra chags med visited several sacred
places in mNga' ris, and in particular, lHun grub sgang, the monastery of the Zhu
family in gTsang (also known as Ri zhing Monastery, No.4). He obtained initiations
and teachings of Bon in the presence of Blo gros bstan rgyal of the Zhu lineage,
who upheld the Zhu tradition. Motivated by the prophecies, he went to Khams and
searched for a place to settle down. He found the place, where he later founded Khra
rgan Monastery, very auspicious. Before he founded the monastery a small religious
establishment was already there. It is said that the monastery is called Khra rgan
(old falcon) because the mountain behind the monastery looks like a falcon warming
itself in the sun.
There was no line of reincarnation in this monastery, but a series of successors.
Khra chags med was succeeded by Zhu btsun g Yung drung khri bde as the head
of the monastery. From him a succession of masters coming from the Zhu family
208



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
followed. The lineage of the monastery was, therefore, as follows:
1. Khra chags med bKra shis rgyal mtshan
2. Zhu btsun gYung drung khri bde
3. Zhu ston Tshul khrims grags pa
4. Zhu btsun gYung drung dbang grags
5. Zhu gyung drung bsod nams
6. Zhu Nyi ma grags pa
7. Zhu Phun tshogs dbang rgyal
8. Zhu Tshul khrims rgyal mtshan
9. Zhu Gyal ba dbang grags
10. Zhu bsTan pa dbang grags
11. Shi cu drung mu
12. Zhu ston gYung drung rgyal ba
13. Zhu Shes rab bstan 'dzin
14. sNan zhig Grub thob
15. Zhu Zla ba grags pa
16. Kun mkhyen Nyi ma bsod nams grags pa
17. Gyal sras Phun tshogs rnam rgyal
18. Zhu rNam rgyal dbang grags
19. Zhu Hun grub rgyal mtshan
20. Zhu g Yung drung ye shes
21. Zhu Nyi nyi lags
22. bsTan 'dzin Ihun grub
23. bsTan pa dbang rgyal
24. A drung
25. Zhu bs Tan 'dzin gtsug phud
26. Zhu bsTan 'dzin grags pa
27. Nyan sgom Rin chen rgyal mtshan
28. Zhu ston bsTan pa lhun grub
29. Zhu Khri 'od
30. Zhu khri g Yung drung grags rgyal
31. mKhan po skal bzang g-yung drung
In 1951 mKhan po skal bzang g-yung drung was still the head of the monastery
and his successors right up to 1991 have maintained the tradition of studying,
practising and preaching the Bon religion in the monastery
This monastery is large and its architectural design is elegant. It stands in
marvelous surroundings with a forest of many different trees where one hears large
and small birds singing here and there. It is a wonderful place of beauty rarely seen
elsewhere.
As for religious objects, there are twenty-two gilt-bronze statues such as gShen
209



Tha 'od dkar, sTon pa gShen rab, rNam par rgyal ba, Byams ma, Dran pa nam mkha',
sTag la me 'bar, Khro bo and Srid pa rgyal mo. There is also one silver statue, one
bronze statue, twelve copper statues, three fine thangka, a reliquary stupa, scriptures
and a complete set of ceremonial implements, including a white conch, a pair of
cymbals, a large oboe, a trumpet made of bone and a silver incense burner. Before
1959, there were thirty-one monks and this number has been maintained, led by
bSam gtan tshul khrims.
Annual Services and Practice of Rituals according to the Zhu tradition
1. In the 1st month there is a congregation and performances of religious
dances.
2. In the 2nd month there are religious services for thirty days.
3. In the 3rd and 4th months there is a performance of rituals of sTag la me 'bar
for seven days.
4. In the 5th month there is the commemoration of Khra chags med bkra shis
rgyal mtshan for two days.
5. In the 6th month there is the performance of the ceremony stong mchod and
the observance of the smyung gnas fast.
6. In the 7th month there is the performance of the ritual Ma tri 'bum sgrub for
seven days.
7. In the 9th month the ritual cycle of Khro bo is performed.
8. In the 12th month the dgu gtor rite is performed.
Daily activities:
In the morning, prayers are said, followed by the practice of meditation and
performance of the ceremony of water offering. In the evening, the propitiation of
the religious protectors such as Ma, bDud and bТsan is performed. The religious
protectors are known as bka'skyong. In addition to these religious services, the ritual
cycles of Khro bo, dal gsas, sTag la, Phur pa, Ge khod, sPyi 'dul and Khyung dmar
are also performed.
The monastery's personnel consists of a lama, an abbot, a disciplinarian, two
chanting conductors, a storekeeper for the bla brang and two storekeepers for the
monastery
With regard to their source of income, at present the monks themselves raise
sixty-two 'bri and yaks. Apart from this, they must derive their living mainly from
the support of their own parents and the religious services they perform in villages.
They are customarily given a 'bri or a yak, along with one hundred yuan, for a
programme of religious service lasting three days, performed by five monks.
210



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chardo and Ngari regions
(73) Lam Tha Monastery
Lam Tha Monastery is in Shog Inga xiang, Nag Icog qu. From Ho rong rdzong,
Nag Icog qu is reached by driving two hours in a south-easterly direction. It is a
day's ride on horseback up to Lam lha Monastery. There is also a shorter way, from
dPa' shod rdzong,
The date of this monastery's establishment remains uncertain, but it is counted
as one of the earlier monasteries in Khams. Before 1959, there were sixty-eight
monks in the monastery. At present there are thirty-three. The condition of the
assembly hall, temple and religious objects is reasonably good. As in other Bonpo
monasteries, the monks must earn their living by going out to perform religious
services in villages as well as receiving support from their own families.
(74) Bal tho Monastery
Bal tho Monastery is near Bal tho village, Shing rong xiang. From the rdzong,
Shing rong xiang is reached by driving northward for one hour. Then, to reach the
monastery, a five-hour ride further north on horseback is required.
No clear record of the date of establishment of this monastery has been found,
but it is said to be one of the earlier ones. At present there are twenty-four monks.
The monastery is somewhat in decline in all aspects of its exterior and interior,
Like other monasteries, for means of livelihood it is dependent on support from the
monks' families and going out to perform religious services in the villages.
(75) Brag dkar Hermitage
This hermitage is in Ri dmar xiang, IHo rong rdzong. Ridmar xiang is reached
by driving twenty kilometres eastward from the rdzong.
This is a very small hermitage. Nothing seems to have been written about this
establishment before 1959. At present there are three hermits.
From Ho rong rdzong to mDzo sgang rdzong, it is 330 kilometres. Since the
region is so mountainous within Ho rong rdzong, travelling can be laborious. Going
by way of spom mda' airport, the road is easy, but it can take eleven hours.



sTeng-chen County
212
Gyal mo
i rngul chu
bDag chu
Khal thg 3
ã Ba Lào
2
Ri-bo-che County
Brag.dicar ri-khrod
dPal-'bar County
iver
Пra-rgan
Shing-rong
Ngulshod
wa chu river
Zhong-rdzong
...
dMar-ri
Sho-pa-mdo
Dzi-tho
Khang - SAT
1Horong
County
dPa'-shod County
County Seat
Township Seat
Administrative Village
Monastery
County Border
River
Road
Footpath
1/820,000
sPo-mes County
-
Z



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu. Chamdo and Ngari regions
(72) Khra rgan Monastery, Plate 1
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)
(72) Khra rgan Monastery. Plate 2 Monks of the monastery
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)
213



(72) Khra rgan Monastery, Plate 3 The Monastery's Lama bSam gtan tshul
khrims (right)
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)
214



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
mDzo sgang rdzongan
mDzo sgang rdzong lies in the south-west of Tibet. It covers an area of 11,726
square kilometres of which farmland occupies 42,000 mu, and forest 392 mu. The
population of this rdzong is about 380,000, most of which is engaged in agriculture.
Forestry and livestock farming are doing quite well. The rdzong has one qu, sixteen
xiang and 160 village councils under its direct control.
This rdzong, which had been under the rule of the government of Tibet, was set
up as the people's administration of mDzo sgang in 1959. The rdzong is blessed with
such animals as wild yaks, leopards, bears, otters and musk deer, which thrive in the
vast forest, and, moreover, with considerable mineral resources, such as gold, silver,
iron and coal. There are nine Bonpo monasteries in this rdzong. This is the most
prosperous rdzong, in terms of Bonpo tradition, next to sTeng chen rdzong,
(76) sTong mda' Monastery
The monastery is also known as mDo dar dgon. Driving for twenty-six
kilometres eastward from the rdzong, we come to mDo dar village in dBu yag xiang,
from which a one hour's drive up the mountain brings us to sTong mda' Monastery
This monastery is situated in the midst of several agricultural villages.
The monastery was founded by g Tsug phud tshul khrims, from whom the
lineage of the heads of the monastery has led down to the ninth. Religious objects
possessed by the monastery are as follows: a clay image of sTon pa gShen rab six
cubits high; two white stupas, six cubits high; and more than ten masks of various
kinds. Before 1959, the monastery had twenty-eight monks; this has now decreased
to only seven. The practice of rituals is much the same as those of other Bonpo
monasteries.
Fifteen kilometres west of the monastery is a holy mountain called sGro ra
Pad ma 'byung gnas. It looks just like a Garuda flying with its wings fluttering.
Every year on the 15th day of the 6th month, the local people get together to
circumambulate the mountain, perform religious dances and engage in other
festivities.
(77) La ngu Monastery
The monastery is located near Srib gru kha village, Krung gling kha xiang. The
village is fifty kilometres south-west of mDzo sgang rdzong. The absence of a road
makes travelling there very difficult. The place called Srib gru kha used to be the site
of one of the main ferries across the river rGyal mo rngul chu.
This is one of the oldest Bonpo monasteries and is said to have been founded by
Rin spungs dBang rgyal. It stands in front of Mount Rin chen spungs. Initially, it was
built on verdant grassland. Later, it was moved to a larger place up the mountain.
Though small, La ngu Monastery has special old architectural characteristics. A story
215



tells why the monastery is called La ngu: at the time of its inauguration, musical
instruments such as conch, oboe, drum, and cymbals were played, making the local
deities of the four directions and those who resided on the mountain pass (la), cry
(ngu) for joy. The monastery's religious objects are of considerable quality and
include statues of sTon pa gShen rab, Byams ma and sTag la me "bar. There was also
an image of the Buddha, said to have descended to the monastery by itself.
In the old days, there were sixty-two monks in this monastery. This number had
diminished to thirty-five in 1959, and at present there are only fifteen monks, led by
Tshul khrims mam dag 'od zer. This lama is very learned in the Bon tradition, its
history and other sciences.
Practice of Rituals
1. In the 1st Tibetan month, from the 4th day to the 6th, there is the
commemoration of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan.
2. In the 3rd month, from the 14th to the 22nd, the ritual cycle of Phur pa is
performed.
3. In the 5th month there is the thousand offerings of sacrificial cake to sTag la
me 'bar.
4. In the 9th month, from the 1st to the 9th day, the rtsa rlung meditation is
practised and from the 14th to the 21st, there is the performance of the
gunacakra offerings to Khro bo.
Daily Activities
From five o'clock to seven in the morning, the monks practise meditation. In
the evening, from seven to eight, they perform the bsang ritual and recite prayers.
(78) Sa bla Monastery
The monastery is located near gCig yon village, sTobs 'bangs xiang. It is sixty
kilometres from the rdzong to the village. As there is no road the trip can be very
difficult.
It is said that this monastery was founded in 1497. Before 1959, there were ten
monks in the monastery. The number has been reduced to only five now. In spite of
its long history of some five hundred years, it has remained something like a small
hermitage and has only a few religious objects, such as the statues of ston pa gShen
rab, rNam par rgyal ba, Byams ma and Tag la me 'bar.
(79) Ri sna Monastery
The monastery is located in Krung gling kha xiang, on the eastern bank of
Gyal mo mgul chu, in the southern part of mDzo sgang rdzong. In the old days the
place was called Rab pa. The distance between the rdzong and the xiang is no more
216



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
than sixty kilometres, but it is very difficult to traverse.
No record concerning the date of establishment of this monastery has remained.
Still it is one of the fairly old Bonpo monasteries.
Before 1959, there were nineteen monks; today there are ten. In the temple
there are just a few religious objects, like the statues of sTon pa gShen rab and Yum
chen Byams ma. In terms of facilities, it is poorly equipped.
Rituals are practised in the same manner as those of other Bonpo monasteries,
The monks rely mainly on support from their own families for their living and
occasionally go out to perform religious services in villages to supplement their
income.
(80) mDangs 'phyar Monastery
This monastery is located near Bal stod village, in the northern part of the
former Rab pa village, in the present Krung gling kha xiang, which lies on the
eastern side of the river rGyal mo mgul chu, in the southern part of mDzo sgang
rdzong. It is a mere sixty kilometres from the rdzong to the village, but it is still a
difficult distance to be travelled.
There are no historical documents clearly recording the date of the monastery's
establishment and there is little oral information. Still, based on the architectural
aspect of the building, it is said to be one of the fairly old Bonpo monasteries,
Before 1959, there were thirty monks, and at present thirty-two. The assembly
hall, temple and religious objects are in quite good condition. The monastery's
activities have no unique characteristics, but are much the same as other Bonpo
monasteries.
As for their source of income, the monks mainly receive support from their
families and the occasional performance of religious services in the monastery or in
villages.
(81) Shug rdzong Monastery
The monastery is near 'Os bab village, Krung gling kha xiang. Originally, the
present Krung gling kha was called Rab pa, and is located on the east side of the
river rGyal mo mgul chu, in the southern part of mDzo sgang rdzong. It is sixty
kilometres from the rdzong to Krung gling kha, and 'Os bab village is in the northern
part of the xiang, close to Bal stod village. The absence of a road makes travelling
very difficult.
It is not clear when this monastery was founded. Before 1959, there were
eighty-five monks and at present there are thirty-five. There is an assembly hall,
a temple and other buildings of appropriate design and size. There are religious
objects of considerable quality, such as the statues of sTon pa gShen rab, Byams ma,
mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan and Khro bo. As for scriptures, there is the bka'
217



'gyur and other books of ritual practice.
In regard to rituals and services, they practise what is commonly done in other
Bonpo monasteries, and have no special activities. For their living, the monks
depend mainly on their own parents and relatives for financial support. Occasionally
they are invited to perform religious services, such as conducting funerals, which
helps supplement their income.
(82) Rab pa Monastery
Rab pa Monastery is located near Rab pa village (which is now called Krung
gling kha) on the east side of the river Gyal mo rngul chu, in the southern part
of mDzo sgang rdzong. From the rdzong to Rab pa is a distance of only sixty
kilometres, but as there is no road, the going is very hard.
Although there is no recorded date for the establishment of this monastery, it is
said to be one of the oldest Bonpo monasteries.
Before 1959, there were no more than eight monks, but at present there are
fourteen. The name of this monastery is said to be related to the fact that the area
where the monastery is located is so large that it would take a day on horseback to
circumambulate it. The place is therefore the best among the local areas and that is
why it is called Rab pa, the "Best".
In the temple of the monastery are several statues of sTon pa gShen rab, Dran
pa nam mkha' and Byams ma, a few thangka and Bonpo scriptures. Otherwise the
facilities are very poor.
As for the monks' main source of income, they depend, just as in the other
small Bonpo monasteries, on their own parents and relatives for support. Besides
this, to make their living, they must supplement this support by going out to perform
religious services.
(83) dByibs pa Monastery
dByibs pa Monastery is located near dByibs pa village, which is to the west of
Gug pa village in Zhwa gling kha xiang. Zhwa gling kha is situated on the east side
of the river rGyal mo mgul chu, in the southern part of mDzo sgang rdzong. From
the rdzong to Zhwa gling kha is a distance of more than fifty kilometres. Although
the distance is not great, travelling it is very hard because of the absence of a road.
The date of this monastery's establishment is unknown, but according to oral
history it is one of the oldest Bonpo monasteries. Before 1959, the monastery had
forty-seven monks. At present, it is a moderate-sized Bonpo monastery of thirty-one
monks, with an assembly hall, a temple, monks' quarters and other buildings. It has
religious objects appropriate to its size and needs, such as statues of sTon pa Khri
gtsug rgyal ba, Dran pa nam mkha', his son Tshe dbang rig 'dzin, sTag la me 'bar
and Srid pa rgyal mo, thangka, the bka' 'gyur, and other books concerning religious
218



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu. Chamdo and Ngari regions
practice. Rituals and services are practised in this monastery as they are in other
Bonpo monasteries of average size. It has no special activities.
As for the monks' main source of income, they receive financial support from
their own parents and relatives. The monastery itself has no other means of earning
revenue. Occasionally the monks are invited to perform religious services, such as
funerals, in villages, which helps supplement their income.
(84) ITag tsha Monastery
Tag tsha Monastery is located near Su mgo village, on the bank of the river
Gyal mo rngul chu, to the south of Gug pa village, Zhwa gling kha xiang. Zhwa
gling kha xiang is in the southern part of the rdzong and Su mgo village is more than
forty kilometres from the rdzong. It is a very difficult distance to travel because there
is no road.
In spite of there being no recorded date for its establishment, this monastery is
also customarily said to be a fairly old Bonpo monastery.
Before 1959, there were seven monks in the monastery, but at present there are
fourteen. The main religious objects in the monastery's temple are statues of ston
pa gShen rab, mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan, Byams ma and others, as well as
several thangka and books. Apart from these it has hardly any facilities.
As for rituals and services, the monks perform the bsang ritual in the morning
and recite prayers in the evening. They perform the common daily activities. There
are no rituals or services specific to this monastery. The monks' main source of
income is, much the same as in other poor Bonpo monasteries, financial support
from their own parents or relatives. The monastery itself has no means of generating
revenue. Occasionally the monks are invited to perform religious services, such as
funerals, in villages, which helps supplement their income.
Proceeding north from mDzo sgang rdzong by car, through the grassland of
spom mda', where an airfield is situated, and along the river rGyal mo mgul chu,
one arrives at dPa' shod rdzong. Driving from mDzo sgang rdzong to dPa' shod
rdzong takes six and a half hours. When we reached the district of dPa' shod rdzong,
the way had been blocked to traffic by road construction, which prevented us from
proceeding. After a long wait of five and a half hours, the road was finally opened.
219



Brag-g.yab County
mDzo sgang
Then thos
sMar-khams County
mDzo-spangbrog.rs
dPa'-shod County
Stong."bangs
County
Sa bla
STongada
tha-stiga
dBu-yag
Skug-rdzony
la
-phyr Gling-kha barua
Ki-sha
Riba
Gling-kha zhol-ma
deyilipa
Rab-chen
D-
105
County Seat
Township Seat
Administrative Village
Monastery
rDza-yul County
County Border
River
**
Road
-----
Footpath
1/1,190,000
220



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
(76) sTong mda' Monastery
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)
(77) La ngu Monastery, The monastery's Lama tshul khrims rtam dag 'od zer
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)



dPa' shod rdzong
dPa' shod rdzong is in eastern Tibet and is part of Chab mdo region. The rdzong
was created by the Tibetan government about eighty years ago. It covers an area
of 12,564 square kilometres, of which 734,000 mu is forest. It has a population of
33,000 and administratively consists of one qu, one town and fourteen xiang, which
contain 125 village councils.
dPa' shod is said to have got its name from the village that used to be near
(shod meaning "nearby place") Mount dPa'rgod. dPa' shod Bla brang was founded
in 1694. In 1959, the people's administration of dPa' shod rdzong was established.
This rdzong stretches over the basin of three rivers, Gyal mo mgul chu, rDza
chu and 'Bri chu. While higher and mountainous in the north-east, the rdzong
contains deep gorges formed along the river rGyal mo mgul chu.
This rdzong is rich in natural resources, such as iron, coal and aluminum, and
is inhabited by many wild animals, including monkeys, deer, musk deer, otters, the
rna ba (Ovis ammon hodgsoni), wild sheep and wild yaks. Moreover, it is an area
highly productive in medicinal materials like the dByar rtswa dgun 'bu (Cordyceps
sinensis), antlers and musk, as well as agricultural products.
(85) dBen mdzod Monastery
dBen mdzod Monastery is situated halfway up the hill, to the west of dBen
mdzod (Wa 'bru) village in 'Jo 'ju xiang, dPa' shod rdzong. From the rdzong, the
monastery is reached by driving twenty kilometres eastward on the highway and
then riding south for six hours on horseback.
This monastery was founded in 1256. Before 1959, there were only four monks,
but at present there are twenty. It is counted as one of the oldest Bonpo monasteries
in Chab mdo region, but has not shown much development because of the lack of
transport facilities and because of other unfavourable conditions. Currently it has
an assembly hall, a temple, monks' quarters and other buildings, and is fairly well
equipped with religious objects such as statues of sTon pa gShen rab, Dran pa nam
mkha', his son Tshe dbang rig 'dzin, rNam par rgyal ba, sTag la me 'bar, mNyam
med Shes rab rgyal mtshan and Srid pa rgyal mo, as well as several thangka and Bon
scriptures.
Rituals and services of this monastery are much the same as those of other
Bonpo monasteries of this region. It does not have any special activities.
As the monastery itself has no means of providing a living for the monks, they
depend on their own parents and relatives for support
(86) 'Bur lung Monastery
"Bur lung Monastery is situated halfway up the hill to the east of dBen mdzod
(Wa "bru) village in 'Jo 'ju xiang, dPa' shod rdzong. From the rdzong, 'Bur lung



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chardo and Ngari regions
Monastery is reached by driving twenty kilometres eastward on the highway and
riding south on horseback for six hours.
This monastery was founded by Khro tshang 'Brug lha in 1096. Before 1959,
there were only ten monks, but at present there are thirty. This was the oldest Bonpo
monastery in the whole of Tibet. The newly built assembly hall and temple are very
fine looking buildings. The religious objects include a clay image of sTon pa gShen
rab as tall as the ceiling, statues of Dran pa nam mkha', mNyam med Shes rab rgyal
mtshan, Byams ma and Khro bo, as well as several thangka and Bon scriptures.
The monks, like those in other Bonpo monasteries, depend on support from
their own parents and relatives for their livelihood, as the monastery has no means of
providing a living for them.
(87) bkra shis rtse Monastery
bKra shis rtse Monastery is also called Wa dag bon dgon. It is located near
the village of Wa dag in Gla ge xiang, dpa' shod rdzong. From the rdzong, Wa
dag village is reached by driving twenty kilometres eastward on the highway. The
monastery is situated halfway up the hill to the south of Wa dag village.
This monastery was founded in 1589. Before 1959, there was a fairly large
assembly hall and a temple containing religious objects that included the following:
a statue of sTon pa gShen rab as tall as the ceiling, statues of rNam par rgyal ba,
Byams ma and the three guardian deities - Ma, bDud and bТsan - each of which was
as tall as the ceiling, and other gilt-bronze statues numbering over three hundred
There used to be eighteen monks; at present there are twenty.
The mountain at the back of the monastery is the abode of Dam can Yul lha dkar
po, a local deity with one head and two arms. He is depicted as mounted on a nanny
goat, holding a knife in his right hand and a black flag in his left. The mountain in
front of the monastery is the abode of gZhi bdag Bon thung, a local deity with a blue
body. He holds a knife in his right hand and an ensign in his left. The mountain to
the right is called lHa g-yag dkar po and the one to the left, rDo rje gzer 'phrang,
As regards rituals and services, in the morning the monks recite prayers, then
practise the rtsa lung meditation, followed by further recitation of ritual texts of
the tutelary deities. In the evening they propitiate the protective deities, as well as
performing the bsur ceremony, which involves casting barley flour into fire.
For their main source of income, the monks depend on their own families for
support. Customarily they are not paid for performing religious services in villages,
but are paid ten yuan a day for funeral services.
To go to Nying khri from dPa' shod rdzong, one passes through the regions of
$Po smad, mThong smad and Klu nang.
The roads in Khams are fraught with difficulty and extreme danger. When we
came to the boundary between dPa' shod rdzong and sPo smad rdzong, we were
223



struck all of a sudden by a small flood from above, and our car was stuck in the
mud. We were quite helpless and could not move, but after finally getting help from
Chinese soldiers, over thirty in number, who dredged up mud and pulled our car up,
we were able proceed on our way. As there were no bridges on the way, we fell into
difficulty and danger again.
Another time, when in despair, we received help from a Khams pa tribesman
with a devout disposition. He guided us along the route, which led us out of danger.
Then again, when we were passing in front of a sand hill on the confines of
mThong smad, our car sank into the sand and we had no way to get out of it. A
shovel was the only tool we had and we struggled with it to get our car out of the
sand. At the same time, rocks began to roll down frequently from above us, so we
had to keep watching out for them. At last we managed to drag the car out and
headed in the direction of Nying khri.
It took us seventeen and a half hours to travel from dPa' shod rdzong to Nying
khri.
224



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
Chab-mdo County
1Ho-rong County
"Khor-chen
Brag-g-yab County
Gyale
punO)
nguy
cho
river
sPo-mes County
Gla-ske
Pad-ma
bkra-shis-Itse
'Byor-bcu
Phu-lung,
'Buplung
Bem-ndad
mDzo-sgàog County
©
-
County Seat
Township Seat
Administrative Village
Monastery
-
County Border
-
River
......
Road
Footpath
1/1.140,000
rDza-yul County
225



Nying khri rdzong
Nying khri rdzong lies in the south-western part of Tibet, at the confluence
of the rivers Nyang chu and Yar lung gTsang po. It covers an area of 10,238
square kilometres, 28,000 mu of which is farmland, 565,000 mu is pastureland and
5,020,000 mu forest. Its population is about 26,000. Administratively, it consists of
one town.
In 1959, the three old rdzong-Kong po rTse la rdzong, bDe gling rdzong and
Jo mo rdzong-were joined together to form Nying khri rdzong and at the same
time its people's administration was established; but in 1964, the administration was
dismantled and Nying khri rdzong came under the direct control of Lhasa. Then, in
1976 the administration of Nying khri rdzong was restored again.
The rdzong is situated along the river Yar lung gTsang po. It contains beautiful
mountains and the region is rich in natural forest. Along the river there is good
farmland where the agriculture is fairly prosperous, as is the pasturage. Various
medicinal herbs grow here, cattle thrive and the area is abundant in carnivores and
herbivores. Roads are good for travellers. Moreover, this rdzong has much that is of
interest, scenically and historically, including Kong po Bon ri, celebrated in Tibet
and beyond.
Bon ri, the Great Sacred Place
From Tag gzigs 'Ol mo lung ring, sTon pa gShen rab, accompanied by five
attendants, came to rescue his seven horses, which were stolen by the demons of
Kong po. sTon pa gShen rab and his attendants travelled down the river Yar lung
gTsang po to kong po, the land of demons. While travelling, sTon pa gShen rab was
obstructed along the way by the three evils - klu, bdud and bisan - out of envy, but
in spite of all the serious obstacles, he subjugated the land, which belonged to black
demons by performing miracles that were beyond all imagination.
Then sTon pa gShen rab and his attendants reached the palace rTse la 'bar ba,
where they were welcomed:
"The lady Kong btsun De mo was the first to honour him. Holding a
nectar-producing bough of juniper in her hand, she proposed a way in which
restitution could be made for the seven horses. The matter was settled through offers
of compensation: firstly, by offering the lady Kong bza' khri Icam to sTon pa gShen
rab as his wife; secondly, by offering bushels of gold and turquoise; and thirdly,
Kong rje, the king of the demons, offered himself and his subjects, who then became
sTon pa gShen rab's attendants."
sTon pa gShen rab then buried many treasures, including the gold and turquoise
he received, at the foot of the craggy hills that looked like scattered jewels, so that
they would be the essence of the soil of the four quarters of Tibet. Saying prayers to
the nectar-producing bough of Kong btsun De mo, he thrust it into the ground there
226



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu. Chamdo and Ngarl regions
as a sign of eternity.
On top of Mount gNyan, he also planted a juniper tree as tall as himself, where
handprints of his four distinguished disciples still remain. The tree is called sKu shug
Idem drug.
He preached the Bon of the Nine Vehicles and he, himself being the lord of
the dMu lineage, identified a mountain and gave it the name dMu ri smug po. This
is the central peak of Mount Bon ri. The summit is also called 1Ha ri gyang tho. He
entrusted the local deities who reside on various peaks to guard the treasures he had
concealed: g Yung drung Iha gnyan rtsal as the guardian of treasure in the centre,
Gangs gnyan stag rtse as the king of the east, Nyang Iha btsan drug as the king of the
north, bDud nag mgams sgra sgrogs as the king of the west and g Yu 'od sman btsun
as the goddess of the south. Kong btsun De mo is the overall protectress of the place
and rDzu 'phrul klu dbang is the special protector of treasures.
The sacred mountain Bon ri and its surroundings became a centre of the
teachings of BongNya'khri btsan po is said to have descended from the sky onto
the summit Hari Gyang tho. He was the first king of Tibet. Co'u and 'Tshe mi were
the first religious attendants of the king; between them and the king there was the
"priest-patron" relationship. The king and his religious attendants resided at the foot
of Mount Muri smug po and inspired the spreading of the Bon teachings.
Since then a number of the gshen religious practitioners have come up to this
holy place and established places for religious practice. Mu ri smug po, the main
peak of Mount Bon ri, is the very highest among the peaks, which include Hari
Gyang tho, Nor bu ri and gShen ri bde Idan. On the slopes and in the valleys of
Mount Bon ri, there were the following religious sites: Srid rgyal, sTag bro sa,
dGyes ri, dGon mying, Srin mo phug, dBus phug, Yang dben, Bya de phug, IHa
ri Gyang tho, gSang gling, Phug gu, Nyi ma phug, sNang ngog, Thugs dkar brag,
Brag dkar zhabs rjes, Dzong chung steng, Shel sku sbug and the cemetery Mi yul
skyid mthing. Mount Bon ri is, therefore, not only a special place for the Bonpo, but
Buddhists as well, who join in its veneration.
Mount Bon ri still receives a stream of pilgrims who accumulate merit
by making circumambulations and many prostrations. Mount Bon ri and its
surroundings present unearthly scenery, with the beautiful high mountains filled with
pine trees, bamboo, medicinal herbs, flowers, herbivores and various kinds of birds.
There were periods of great celebration in the vicinity of the mountain. One
of the major festivities in a cycle of twelve years was an event called Nyang po lha
gsol, held in the tiger year, from the 1st to the 8th day of the 8th month. During this
period, people got together in the seven Bonpo monasteries, including sNang ngog,
and went through the ceremonies, true to the time-honoured tradition, of initiation,
the fortune-call ritual and religious dances. The lay folk also performed dances,
horse-racing, horseback archery and the fortune-call parade.
227



In the mouse year, on the 8th day of the eighth month, there was the
performance of the fortune-call ceremony by the religious practitioners, and dances
and songs by the lay folk, as in the case of the tiger year. The origin of this festival
goes back to a Bonpo hermit:
In the Sixth Rab byung (1327-1386) a lama of Shel zhig from the Khams
province rediscovered a crystal image of sTon pa gShen rab called Dri med shel
sku, in the place called Shel sku sbug, and took it back to Khams. Similarly, three
text-rediscoverers from Khyung po found, in Thugs dkar brag, a conch believed
to be self-grown from the teeth of sTon pa gShen rab and took it back to Khyung
po. Following that, in kong po, a mountain crumbled, rainfall became rare, fields
produced little harvest, disease spread among people and cattle, famine struck and
many other disasters ensued, which reduced the people to a state of helplessness.
During this time, the hermit dPon gsas Ri pa 'brug gsas was in meditation at the cave
Thod g-yu phug in Nying khri. The hermit understood the reason for the disasters
and said, "The fertility of the soil had been weakened because of the excavation of
the treasures, the image Dri med shel sku and the tooth conch." He therefore made
the people perform the ritual of propitiation dedicated to the local deities and the
fortune-call ceremony. When these ceremonies ended, rain began to fall, people had
a good harvest and the epidemic abated.
The local people propitiated the goddess Srid pa rgyal mo in her various
aspects: at Srid rgyal Monastery, it was dKar mo Srid rgyal; at rDzong chung steng
Monastery, sMug mo Srid rgyal; and at sTag bro sa, Srid rgyal drel nag. The people
of the three villages of Nya mgor propitiated the goddess A ma Yu mo. They also
kept the tradition of performing the bsang ritual on the 15th and 30th of every month
at different sacred sites of Mount Bon ri where there were special signs, such as
footprints of early sages on rocks. This holy mountain, to which all devotees pay
homage and make pilgrimages, is one of the most important religious sites in the
world and, as such, it is well known.
(88) Srid rgyal Monastery
Srid rgyal dgon chen is situated close to Nying khri rdzong, halfway up the holy
mountain Bon ri. Cars can reach the foot of the mountain.
One of the thirty-seven centres of Bon was Kong yul Se mo thang. These
centres were established during the time of Mu khri btsan po, a son of gNya' khri
btsan po. It is at Se mo thang in Kong po that Srid rgyal Monastery is located
The lineage of lamas of this monastery goes back to Ri pa 'Brug gsas. He is
said to have been the emanation of the tutelary deity sTag la med 'bar. A historical
document states:
"In the land called Bon ri
There will be a hermit named 'Brug gsas
228



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
Who will possess a 'magic-stone',
Will be courageous and avert wars,
And guide 300,000 people to salvation.
Anyone who contacts him will be rewarded."
This hermit was born in 1270 in rDza rong into the clan of Ma ra. Ma ra is
a subdivision of the clan Rang bya. He was the second son of dKon cog dge, the
father, and Alcam U gu, the mother. Having been in religious service until the age
of thirteen years, he was given the name 'Brug gsas rgyal. From the time he was
fourteen until he was nineteen years of age, he practised meditation. He then listened
to various masters in China, 'Jang and Mi nyag. He then became conscious of the
impermanence of life. He therefore travelled to Central Tibet and began to practise
more meditation, as well as to perform circumambulation around sacred sites such as
Ti se, Ma pang, Bye ma g-yung drung and sPos ri ngad Idan. He then travelled down
to Kong po in accordance with a prophecy of Srid pa rgyal mo. In 1330, he "opened
the door of Bon ri" (that is to say, he identified the mountain), because people had
forgotten the fact that the place was one of the thirty-seven religious centres of Bon.
This was due to the long period of time that passed since sTon pa Shen rab's visit to
the place and also due to the chequered history of the Bon religion.
"Brug gsas took up residence in the cave g Yu phug, near which the three streams
of Nyang meet. He remained there in meditation for three years and countenanced
deities of tranquil and wrathful aspects from whom he received more prophecies.
He was able to make the eight kinds of demons serve him. While devoting himself
to retreat-practice of Khro bo and Phur pa on the mountain, he received signs from
the goddess dkar mo Srid rgyal for founding a monastery at this place. He therefore
founded Srid rgyal Monastery there. The interior and exterior of the monastic
buildings were of good design and their religious contents were rich. More than one
hundred monks from all directions gathered together there.
He left traces of his body and footprints on rocks around the site of the
monastery and passed away at the age of eighty. He promised that he would come
back in the form of a bird to see the monastery every year on the 13th day of the 4th
Tibetan month. A festival called don chen Bya mjal was, thereafter, held on this
day and it was the occasion when people went to see the bird.
The line of the heads of the monastery was as follows:
1. Ri pa 'Brug gsas
2. Rag shi Nyi ma rgyal mtshan
3. Bru ston Nyi ma rgyal mtshan
4. La tri hrirda (Zhang zhung language: Dam pa blo gros)
5. sDong sgom bsTan pa lhun grub
6. Nal 'byor Nam mkha' hun grub



7. Tshe dbang lhun grub
8. bs Tan pa rgyal mtshan
9. gYung drung mam rgyal
10. Rin chen tshul khrims
11. Kun bzang Ihun grub
12. Gyal ba gtsug phud
13. Tshe dbang legs mchog
15. Gyal ba blo gros
16. Mi 'gyur rgyal mtshan
epherd
17. Hun grub dbang rgyal
18. gYung drung dbang rgyal
19. Tshe dbang'od zer
20. Khyung sprul gYung drung phun tshogs
21. Zla ba don 'grub
22. Tshul khrims blo gros
23. mTha' yas rgya mtsho
24. Nor skyabs Rinpoche
Dam pa blo gros, the fourth in the line, founded the monastery called rDzong
chung kha, gDong sgom bsTan pa lhun grub, the fifth, founded sTag rtse Monastery
(No.89) in his later life. bs Tan pa rgyal mtshan, the eighth, carried out all the duties
delegated to him by sPyan gsal Kun 'phel gling, an official serving under the Fifth
Dalai Lama (1617-1682). As a reward, the Dalai Lama granted the monastery the
special privilege of establishing an independent monastic code, building a rooftop
and making a double tamarisk-stems-work on the outer wall of the monastic
building. At that time there were four hundred monks in the monastery. Mi 'gyur
rgyal mtshan, the sixteenth in the line, founded dGyes ri Monastery. Khyung sprul
gYung drung phun tshogs, the twentieth, founded Gon sding Monastery.
At present there are nineteen monks in the monastery. It has a complete set of
the printed edition of the bka' 'gyur and a complete set of manuscripts of the bka'
brten. Besides these, there are ritual texts and more than two hundred volumes of
manuscripts.
Annual Ritual Services
1. In the 1st month the birthday ceremony of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal
mtshan is celebrated on the 5th day, and the memorial service of stong
rgyung mthu chen was held for fifteen days.
2. In the 2nd month there is a recitation of the bka' 'gyur and on the occasion
of the festival of sTon pa gShen rab's conversion of demons.
3. In the 3rd month the ritual cycle of one of the five tutelary deities is
230



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
performed for ten days.
4. In the 4th month, on the 10th day, the birthday of Dran pa nam mkha' was
celebrated; on the 13th, the memorial service of Ri pa 'Brug gsas was
held. For the latter, the Zhi khro khri mchod ceremony was performed.
This festival, called Gon chen Bya mjal ("Meeting the bird of the great
monastery'), was the occasion when the local people would dance and sing,
and expect to see the vulture, as Ri pa 'Brug gsas had promised that he would
come in the form of the bird every year.
5. In the 5th month, starting from the Sth day, the memorial service of mNyam
med Shes rab rgyal mtshan was held for ten days.
6. In the 6th month, on the 10th day, the birthday ceremony of Tshe dbang rig'
dzin and Pad ma 'byung gnas was held.
7. In the 7th month, starting from the 15th day, the confession ceremony was
held for five days.
8. In the 8th month there was the performance of the ritual cycle of dBal gsas
and the offering of the sacrificial cake a hundred times to the guardians of the
Bon religion for eight days.
9. In the 9th month, starting from the 13th day, there was the performance of the
Ma tri 'bum sgrub ceremony as a memorial service of sTon pa gShen rab for
fifteen days.
10. In the 10th month, on the 15th day, a general religious service was held.
11. In the 11th month, there was the performance of the thousand offerings of
the sacrificial cake to sTag la me "bar and the short dgu gtor rite for fifteen
days.
12. In the 12th month, there was a the performance of the birthday celebration
of sTon pa gShen rab on the 15th day, based on the gYung drung klong rgyas
and the dgu gtor rite based on the ritual cycle of Khro bo for fifteen days.
Daily assemblies are held to make offerings to the deities.
Tea is served twelve times a day, and meals with meat and butter are provided
according to availability. Apart from this, the monks must make their living by going
out and performing religious services in villages and receiving support from their
parents and relatives.
(89) sTag rtse gYung drung gling Monastery
sDong sgom bsTan pa lhun grub, the fifth head of Srid rgyal Monastery, was a
native of Amdo. He founded sTag rtse g Yung drung gling in 1680.
The line of the heads of this monastery is as follows:
1. sDong sgom bsTan pa lhun grub
231



2. Tshe dbang Ihun grub
3. Rin chen tshul khrims
4. skal bzang Ihun grub
5. Gyal ba gtsug phud
6. Tshe dbang mchog legs
7. I Hun grub dbang rgyal
8. gYung drung dbang rgyal
9. bsTan pa rgyal mtshan
10. Tshe dbang mam rgyal
11. Tshe dbang bdud 'dul
This monastery formerly possessed such religious objects as the following: a
marvelous precious stone found on the peak of Bon ri by sDong sgom bsTan pa lhun
grub; the latter's image, called ICe me thub: and statues of Phur pa, rTa mgrin and
Padmasambhava. There were more than two thousand manuscripts including the
bKa''gyur and bka'brten.
At present the monastery possesses relics of sDong sgom bsTan pa lhun grub,
a large white conch, more than ten statues, including Phur pa, rTa mgrin, and bka'
gyur and bka'brten. There are no more than twelve monks in this monastery now.
Near the monastery there is a rock-face upon which sDong sgom bs Tan pa
Ihun grub inscribed the five syllables stag, rise, g-yung, drung and gling with his
fingers, and a stone with his handprint on it. At the back of the monastery there is
a meditation cave of the four scholarly ones; to the north there is a rock with an
amazing shape, called Ye shes dbal mo; up the valley there is the meditation cave of
sDong sgoms bsTan pa lhun grub. The area around the monastery is covered with
dense forest of various kinds of trees and is considered to be the abode of the three
protective deities, Ma, bDud and bТsan. It stands in a magnificent place surrounded
by mountains, the abodes of the local deities, including Ha gnyan gYung drung rtse
in the centre, Gyal po Kong gnyan rgyal in the east, bDud nag rNgams sgra sgrog in
the west, Ma mo g Yu 'od sman in the south and Nyang lha bТsan drug in the north
Services and Rituals
1. In the 1st month there is the memorial service of mNyam med Shes rab
rgyal mtshan for six days starting from the 1st day of the month, and the
performance of the offering of sacrificial cake one hundred times to sTag la
me 'bar and one thousand times to the protective deities for nine days.
2. In the 2nd month, offerings of the sacrificial cake are made to Ge khod gsang
drag for eleven days.
3. In the 3rd month, starting from the 8th day, offerings of the sacrificial cake
are made to dBal gsas for ten days.
4. In the 5th month, starting from the 8th day, the ritual of rNam rgyal stong
232



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
mchod is performed for seven days.
5. In the 9th month, starting from the 22nd day, offerings of the sacrificial cake
are made to sTag la me 'bar for ten days.
6. In the 11th month, starting from the 9th day, the stag rtse me mchod is
performed for seven days.
7. In the 12th month, starting from the 22nd day, the dgu gtor rite is performed
for ten days.
As for daily activities, the day is divided into four parts: in the first, the bsang
ritual; in the second, water offering and the bsur ceremony, in the third, prayers; and
last, propitiation of the protective deities.
The local deity residing on the hill behind the monastery is called Pho lha 'Ba'
ba dpal Idan and the local deity of sTag rtse village is the goddess A ma Pad mo.
For their means of living, the monks receive an annual stipend of 2,880 yuan
from the lama, and the local devotees offer over ten thousand yuan for the expenses
of the performance of the rituals mentioned above.
To go to rTse thang in Ho kha from Nying khri rdzong one takes the route
that passes through Glang rdzong. The road is reasonably good, but it is very often
winding and, moreover, one must go up and across the big mountain pass called sPor
thang la. It can, therefore, take some twelve hours to reach rTse thang.
From Tse thang to sNye mo rdzong is a drive of three and a half hours,
crossing the large bridge at Chu shur.
233



234
sPo-mes County
Kong-po rgya-mda' County
sTong-mjuga
County
Nying
bryad-8
Sndd
Me-tog County
Tag-rtse
Tag-rise gYung.dring-gling
©
sMan-gling County
County Seat
Township Seat
Administrative Village
Monastery
Mountain
County Border
River
Road
1/1,170,000
Footpath



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu. Chamdo and Ngari regions
235
(88) Srid rgyal Monastery
(Photo S. G. Karmay 1987)



(89) Tog rtse gYung trung giling Monastery. Plate 1
(Photo Phuntso Tsering Sharyul 1998)
236



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chardo and Ngari regions
237
(89) STog rtse gYung drung gling Monastery, Plate 2 The "Du khang in construction
(Photo S. G. Karmay 1987)



The juniper tree sku shug Idem drug at Nying khri
(Photo S. G. Karmay 1987)
238



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
Prayer wheels at Nying khrisku shug Idem drug
(Photo S. G. Karmay 1987)
239



sGar rdzong, mNga'ris
sGar rdzong lies in the west of Tibet, along the river valleys of the Seng ge
gtsang po and sGar gtsang po, and is one of the eighteen rdzong in this region. It is
17,018 square kilometres in area, 8,900 mu of which is farmland. Administratively, it
consists of four qu, one town and eleven xiang. There are thirty-six village councils.
The name sGar is said to have come from the many military camps (sgar) that
dGa'Idan tshe dbang set up in this area as reinforcements for the government of
Tibet. After that the area came to be called sGar. The rdzong was created in 1959.
The region of sGar is populated by semi-nomads. There are many livestock
animals, such as yaks, goats and sheep, oxen, bulls, mdzo and mdzo mo, horses and
mules. There is also a considerable amount of wheat, barley and beans harvested.
The rdzong is rich in minerals, including coal, white salt, gold, lead and salt. It is,
moreover, the habitat of a great many animals, such as wild yaks, yellow leopards,
wild asses, black bears, Tibetan lynxes, antelopes, Tibetan antelopes, foxes and
wolves. There are also many unique characteristics of sGar rdzong to be seen in the
popular old legends, myths, music, dances and other facets of the culture.
sGar rdzong possesses a number of sites of historical interest, including the
monasteries of Dri bda' spos ri, Gyam smyug lha khang, mDun chu Monastery and
Guru gyam, the Bonpo monastery. Many of the important Bonpo monasteries can
still be visited.
(90) Gu ru gyam Monastery
Guru gyam Monastery is located in Mon mtsher qu, sGar rdzong. It is 250
kilometres from sGar rdzong to Gangs sTi se. From there, one must travel sixty
kilometres further to Mon mtsher xiang, then seven kilometres to Dri bda' spos ri,
and another seven kilometres westward. The distance is long, but the road is in good
condition.
The place where Guru gyam Monastery is located is called Khyung lung
dngul mkhar, which is one of the oldest Bonpo religious sites. It was there that the
capital of the Zhag zhung kingdom was found. It was there too that gShen chen Dran
pa nam mkha', one of the most important Bon masters, flourished. Then the Bon
religion's fortune declined and its religious establishments fell as lamp-light dying
from lack of oil. Now they are nothing but names.
In 1936, Khyung sprul 'Jigs med nam mkha'i rdo rje founded the monastery
mDo sngags grags rgyas gling at Guru gyam. It has now become fairly large and
the condition of its buildings, religious objects and offering implements is reasonably
good. At present, the monastery is taken care of by the scholar bsTan 'dzin dbang
grags, and there are seven monks and three nuns.
In regard to annual services and rituals, those practised at this monastery are
much the same as other Bonpo monasteries.
240



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
The main Bonpo religious sites in Pu rang rdzong
Pu rang rdzong is in the south-western Tibet. It is 12,497 square kilometres
in area, which includes 11,000 mu of farmland. It has a population of 7,300, and
consists of three qu and ten xiang. There are fifty-one village councils.
Pu rang is one of the oldest and most celebrated places in Tibetan history. There
are a number of sacred sites in this rdzong: Mount Ti se: sPos ri ngad Idan; Mount
sMan mo nag snyil, the abode of the goddess Gangs can ma; Gangs tshe ring, where
the cave of Mi la ras pa is situated; Mount Tse brgyad, the abode of the goddess
Tara; the lake Ma pang g-yu mtsho; the spring mThong ba rang grol, said to be the
source of the river Ganges; the cliff Gad pa gser gyi bya phibs; and the lake Gung
brgyud dngul gyi mtsho mo. There is also the famous Budhist monastery 'Khor
chags.
Pu rang rdzong is populated by semi-nomadic people, and produces one-third of
the grain output of the whole mNga' ris region. It also has good pasturage for yaks,
goats and sheep, cows, bulls, horses, donkeys, mules, mdzo and mdzo mo.
Moreover, this rdzong is very rich in mineral resources, such as iron, white
salt and gold, and animals, such as yellow leopards, wild yaks, Tibetan lynxes, wild
asses, wild sheep, foxes, otters, antelopes, rgo ba, wolves, wild geese and cranes.
Mount Ti se
Mountain Ti se was, originally, in ancient times, a specific holy place of Bon
With the spread of Buddhism in Tibet, it became a holy mountain of both Bonpo
and Buddhists, but due to the history of the Bon doctrine, the monastic communities
around the mountain were gradually taken over by various Buddhist orders such as
bKaldgams pa and bka' brgyud pa. The venerable Mi la ras pa even claimed to be
the proprietor of the mountain.
Ma pang g-yu mtsho
Ma pang g-yu mtsho is an important sacred site for both Bonpo and Buddhists,
and is visited every year by many lay and clerical devotees of Bon and pilgrims from
other countries. They make circumambulations of the lake, prostrating themselves
with all their devotion.
241



Seng ge kha-"bab river
Ri-thog County
Seng
Se
kha
"bab
bKrishis-sgang
river
Glang-dma
sGar
sGar grong gar-pa
glsang
rTswa mda'-County
dGe-rgyas County
County Seat
Township Seat
Administrative Village
Monastery
County Border
Mon-itsber
River
-
Road
Footpath
1/1,880,000
242



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
(90) Guru gyar Monastery, Plate 1
(Photo F. Pommaret 1999)
243



244
(90) Guru gyam Monastery, Plate 2
(Photo F. Pommaret 1999)



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Nagchu, Chamdo and Ngari regions
(90) Guru gyam Monastery, Plate 3 Guru-gyam Monastery with the view of Sutlej
(Photo F. Pommaret 1999)



246
(90) Guru gyam Monastery. Plate 4 Cave of Dran-pa nam-mkha'
(Photo F. Pommare: 1999)



Bonpo monasteries and temples
in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
Refer to pp. 666-668 for the abbreviations of Tibetan sources.
The bo County
Introduction
The bo, sometimes called The bo gorge (The bo rong) is a long, deep gorge
with numerous side-gorges through which flows the The bo Chu nag or 'Brug
chu. Geographically it belongs to the sGang gsum rong drug ("three hills and six
gorges").
The bo County is located in southeast Gannan Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture
of Gansu province in China. The county covers an area of 51,480000 sq km, 60%
of which are covered by forest. The county is divided into twelve districts (xiang):
s Teng ka, Gyi ba, Kha pa, sTag ra, Nyin ngo, dBang bzang, Huayuan, Azha, Do
2. Bya 'bab and La rtse khog. It comprises a total of two hundred and
twenty-one villages. The population is 3201, about 80% of which are Tibetan. Most
of the inhabitants are farmers who practise both agriculture and animal husbandry.
History
The bo was occupied by A zha in the sixth century, and descendents of A zha's
people may still be found in the following thirteen villages in A zha valley (A
zha khog), one of the side-gorges in A zha district (xiang): Nags sked, Arta srib,
Khe lam, Phyug bcu, Pe gseb, Nags gong, Nyin pa, bTsun mo, sMad lung, rGyab
klu gong ma, rGyab klu 'og ma, ITag srib, Sa dkar sgang. Shortly after A zha's
invasion, the Tibetan army defeated A zha's forces and annexed the whole The
bo area to Tibet. Ancient Chinese sources refer to the bo as Di Zhou (Di is the
Chinese pronunciation of The, Zhou the Chinese word for prefecture), and state
that it was established as a prefecture in 577 A.D. It is also mentioned that at the
time, in addition to the present The bo county area, the prefecture included mDzo
dge and Nan ping located in present day southern Gansu. In recent history The bo
was conquered from the North by the King of Cone and remained under the control
of Cone until the nineteen-forties. The bo was intergrated into Cone Autonomous
Region in 1950 and established as a separate county in 1962.
It is not certain when Bon first reached the area; according to oral history, it
was during the Imperial period when the Yarlung kings unified Tibet and the 'Phags
pa mnams gsum spread Bon in Amdo. Later, with the development of Buddhism in
the area, many Bonpo monasteries were converted to Buddhism, especially to the
dGe lugs pa tradition.
There are more than twenty Buddhist monasteries in The bo, all of which
are de lugs pa with the exception of sPe gu Monastery which is Sa skya pa.
249



The first Buddhist monastery in The bo appears to be s Teng ka Monastery, which
was founded by dPal Shes rab 'bar, a famous disciple of 'Phags pa Blo gros rgyal
mtshan(1235-1281), and which was later converted to the de lugs pa tradition
The de lugs pa began to establish monasteries in the area from the late sixteenth
century onwards three monasteries at the end of the sixteenth century, six in the
seventeenth century, six in the eighteenth century, three in the nineteenth century,
whose foundation date remains unknown.
(91) g Tso tshang Monastery
1. Name
gTso tshang Monastery's full name is gSang sngags smin grol dar rgyas gling.
g Tso is the family name of g Tso 'phags Zla ba rgyal mtshan whose descendents
founded the three monasteries - Ze kha, Bya brang and gSer gzhong-that
constitute gTso tshang. Since the monastery is presently located in Legs lung village,
it is also known as Legs lung Monastery. In the local dialect, the name of the village
used to be La lo, but since no one no longer knows the original meaning of the term,
the monastery's name was recently changed to Legs lung, "Good Valley", because of
the term's positive connotation.
2. Location
In the early nineteen-eighties, the authorities granted permission to rebuild Ze
kha, Bya brang and gSer gzhong monasteries together as one monastery at the site
of Bya brang Monastery in Bya brang village, where the main assembly hall ('du
khang) had escaped destruction. However, since there was no longer enough land
there to rebuild all three monasteries, Legs lung village was chosen as a new site.
The site is located in Drongtsa ("Brong tsha) valley, 2 km east of the The bo county
seat. The mountain behind the monastery (rgyab ri) is part of the stag sgang range.
The monastery, nestled in the mountain, is situated on the north bank of the eastward
flowing 'Brug chu river and faces south (latitude: 34°02'93"N , longitude: 103°15'
22"E).
The original site of Ze kha monastery (latitude: 34°02'41"N, longitude: 103
1467"E) is located 1 km northeast.
The original site of Bya brang Monastery is located 2 km east of county town
on the opposite river bank (latitude: 34°02'27"N, longitude: 103°15'35"E).
The original site of gSer gzhong Monastery (latitude: 34°35'45"N, longitude:
103°30'27"E) is located 5 km east of county town on the north bank of the river.
3. History
According to oral tradition, the three brothers and great Bonpo masters Do
250



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
phags chen mo, skyang 'phags Nyi ma rgyal mtshan and gTso 'phags Zla ba rgyal
mtshan came to Amdo to spread the Bon doctrine. They opened" many hermitages
(ri khrod), some of which later became monasteries (for instance, sNang zhig
Monastery No. 180, one of the largest Bonpo monasteries in Tibet, was originally a
hermitage founded by Do 'phags chen mo). The three masters played a key role in
the first spread of Bon in Amdo. There are descendents of gTso still living in the bo,
Khri ka, Shar khog (-Zung chu) and Gan rgya in Amdo. Kyang za Yig rtsis ma, the
mother of the three masters, also a fervent Bonpo, established her main residence
at a site known as dGu skyang. gTso 'phags Zla ba rgyal mtshan is believed to
have travelled extensively throughout the area, actively spreading the Bon religion.
Although he founded only a number of sacred sites (and no monastery), he made a
profound impression on the local culture and traditions. One of his mother's sacred
sites and his main ritual and cremation sites are located at Chu gter rdzong, on Brag
dkar bya rgod, a sacred mountain (gnas ri) in Amdo. The first Bonpo monasteries
were founded much later (only four to five generations ago) by g Tso 'phags's
descendents. At present the remaining known descendents of g Tso 'phags live in the
three villages that are financing the reconstruction of the three monasteries. Five of
the families live in Ra nang village which is responsible for Ze kha Monastery, four
in Bya brang village which is responsible for Bya brang Monastery, and two in gSer
gzhong village which is responsible for gSer gzhong Monastery. There is no doubt
that the 'Phags pa rnams gsum were lay people and that their religious tradition was
permeated by indigenous customs and beliefs. However, the monasteries - which
emerged much later -- seem to have been strongly influenced by Buddhism.
Since g Tso tshang Monastery in fact comprises three monasteries --Ze kha,
Bya brang, and gSer gzhong-it is important to mention here the information
concerning their respective historical backgrounds,
Ze kha
The date of Ze kha Monastery's foundation and the identity of its founder
remain obscure; even A skal, the only surviving monk who has some knowledge
on the history of g Tso tshang and who wrote the only historical account of the
monastery (TGLG) is uncertain. The first master of Ze kha Monastery, Shar ba khri
skyang, was born in stod mtsho 'phel into one of the three Khri skyang villages of
Zung chu County in rNga ba Prefecture; the second master was born in rGya myi ya
ru (the exact location of which remains unknown). The third master was born in En
'dzin mtsho 'dus. During his lifetime the monastery's assembly hall was destroyed
by fire and rebuilt. He travelled to Central Tibet and Khams. He was renowned as
a saint, and was believed to be endowed with miraculous powers (grub rtags); He
is said to have founded the monastery's 'cham (monastic dance). The fourth master
remains unidentified. The fifth, Bla ma skyabs, was born in IDong ba village of Brag
251



sgom ba; his father was called A dam and his mother Klu mo. He broke his religious
vows, so three influential monks of Ze kha - Dran pa skyabs, bSod nams dar rgyas
and Ardo-invited Tshul khrims rgyal mtshan, a descendent of Do 'phags chen
po, then aged five, from Nga khog to take his place in 1930. However, the new
incumbent also broke his vows when he turned twenty-five, and was replaced by
his brother Bon slebs Nam mkha' bstan'dzin, the present master of g Tso tshang
Monastery. Before 1958, Ze kha Monastery comprised a two storey assembly hall
with five rooms on each floor, a common house (spyi khang) with nine rooms and
a two-storey building with five rooms called rNga sgra khang. According to oral
tradition, the monastery was built on the site of an ancient Chinese Han fort.
Bya brang
Although the real name of Bya brang Monastery's first lama remains unknown,
he was locally known as gSer so can and was born in dGu skyang. According to oral
tradition, he left dGu skyang with a retinue in search of an auspicious place to build
a monastery. Disappointed by the first two sites where he expected to receive some
favourable omen, he continued his search. As he was passing through a place called
Nags 'bul beyond Tsha bzo mountain, he came upon a dead body which turned out
to be that of the son of the Abze village chief who had been killed by a gang of
robbers. He covered up the corpse, left his favourite dog behind to guard the corpse,
and went to look for the deceased man's father. He eventually met the chief and his
entourage who were looking for the son. The chief, moved by the Lama's solicitude
for his dead son, requested him to become his spiritual master and offered him land
on which to build the monastery, as well as fields and an estate to support it. The
chosen site was known as Bya brang ("Bird's chest") because of its garuda-like
shape. gSer so can accepted the offer and thus Bya brang Monastery was built. His
successor and incarnation was born in Mar sgur village not far from the monastery.
Not much is known about the third incarnation except that he too was born in
Mar sgur. However there are many fantastical tales relating his miraculous deeds
circulating among the local Bonpo community. The fourth incarnation was born in
En dzili snya bza'. The fifth was born in 1918, and his father was Klu 'bum bsod
nams. He studied under Hor btsun bs Tan 'dzin blo gros and obtained the Rab 'byams
pa degree at gYung drung gling Monastery (No.2), and thus acquired a reputation as
a learned lama. He built a new assembly hall. He died in 1958 at gYung drung gling.
Before 1958, the monastery comprised a new assembly hall built of wood with five
rooms on each floor, and a two-storey common house (spyi khang) with five rooms
on each floor, likewise built of wood.
gSer gzhong
The first master of gSer gzhong Monastery, a descendent of g Tso 'phags called
252



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
Thor cog can, arrived from Dwang ra in the North to look for a place to build a
monastery. He stopped at the site of gSer gzhong one night to rest and dreamt
that a fox had stolen one of his boots, thus preventing him from travelling further
However, he found the fox's den with his boot inside. Thor cog can took this as a
favourable omen and decided to build the monastery there. Its construction was
financed by A nag dbang chen and gShen tsha glang thar.
Thor cog can's reincarnation was born in sTag ri snya nang. The following
incarnation and third lama of the monastery was born in En 'dzi'i nyin ri. The
fourth, Shes rab bstan 'dzin was born at sGang ri kha in 1907 and was enthroned at
the age of six. He studied under Kun bzang tshang from Nang zhig in The bo and
later went himself to sNang zhig to further his studies. He also travelled to central
Tibet with an entourage. On the way, at Sog sde in Nag chu kha, he subdued a
demon, a feat which earned him considerable fame and popularity. After spending
three years at gYung drung gling and seven years at Grwa sa 'og ma i.e. sTag rtse ri
khrod in Kong po to study and collect funds for the monasteries, he returned to The
bo where he died in 1954 at the age of forty-seven.
Another incarnation of the same lama was born almost at the same time, in
1916. His father was named Klu 'bum and his mother g Nam sman 'tsho, He was
enthroned at the age of twelve and his appointed tutor (vongs dzin) was Tshe dbang
shes rab. He left the monastery at a young age to search for his own spiritual teacher
and whom he found in the person of bSe ba drung ram pa Shes rab phun tshogs at
sKyang tshang Monastery (No. 202). He studied and practised assiduously for many
years until his master's death, after which he returned to the bo where he spent four
years at De gsal ri khrod, a hermitage he had founded. He then travelled to Central
Tibet with two students via Kyang phyag. There is a record of all the Bonpo and
Buddhist monasteries and sacred sites of Amdo, Khams, gTsang, dBus, Nag chu kha,
mNga' ris which he visited on his way. He also studied under Shar rdza bra shis
rgyal mtshan for two years. While in Central Tibet, he made a three-year retreat to
practise the secret Ma rgyud tantra in a cave at Ha ri gyang tho where King du
khri btsan po is said to have practised the sPyi spungs tantra of the Bon religion.
A message from his monastery informing him of a disaster and requesting him to
return drew him from his retreat. Back in the bo he chose to stay at the hermitage
which he had recently established and not at his residence in the monastery. He
became renowned throughout the area as an outstanding lama. He died in 1958 in
Cone.
In addition to the above-mentioned lamas of the main lineage, there are many
other famous masters and practitioners whose stories are well known by the local
population. Before 1958, the monastery comprised a three-storey assembly hall with
seven rooms on each floor, a three-room sgrub khang and a five-room spyi khang, all
built of wood.



In the early nineteen-eighties, the elder monks from all three monasteries
gathered to discuss how to rebuild the three monasteries together (permission was
granted for only one monastery). They sought the advice of Bon slebs Nam mkha
bstan'dzin, the head lama of Ze kha at the time, and requested him to supervise
the reconstruction of g Tso tshang Monastery. The new assembly hall has twelve
pillars. The most sacred objects within are a statue of ston pa gShen rab which was
discovered by dBal khyung sMon lam rgyal mtshan at gNas chen gSang ba yang
rdzong, and brought to the monastery by Bon Isebs Nam mkha' bstan'dzin.
4. Hierarchical system
- bla ma
- dbon po
-dbu mdzad
-dge skos
- gnyer pa,
- 'go bdag bla ma
- las sne
- spyi ba
- dkor gnyer or lha gnyer
- mar chen
- ja mar
- ja g-yog
- chu len
Two common practices in monasteries are mang ja, tea offering and gyed
phogs, money and other offerings distributed among the monks during assemblies.
5. Current number of monks
There are thirty-three monks and novices in gTso tshang Monastery.
6. Current education
At first A skal only taught the young monks reading and reciting. Later he
began to teach a little grammar from texts such as the Sum bcu pa and rTags
jug. In 1996, Bon slebs Nam mkha' bstan'dzin sent s Tag tsha Kun grol from
rTogs Idan Monastery (No.178) to gTso tshang to be the head of a meditation
college, to teach Tibetan, Bonpo theory and practice to all the monks, and to guide
the three-year meditation retreat (lo gsum) following the tradition (phyag len) of
Togs Idan Monastery. According to this tradition, The lo gsum must begin on the
11th day of the 4th month according to the Tibetan calendar and the first period
of the first year begins with the practice of meditation according to the Khrid yig
dmar mo mdzub tshugs for one hundred nights. The second period of the first year
254



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
begins on the 1st of September with the practice of meditation according to the
rTsa lung gsang mdzod by Kun grol grags pa for one hundred nights. The first
period of the second year is devoted to the introduction (sngon 'gro) to the rDzogs
chen tradition according to the bKa'lung rgya mtsho by Shar rdza bra shis rgyal
mtshan (1859-1934) for one hundred nights, and the second period to rDzogs chen
meditation for one hundred nights. In the third year, the Khrid yig dmar mo mdzub
Ishugs is again used as a base for practice as sngon 'gro and bcud len for one
hundred nights, followed by the Tshe dbang bod yul ma, including the mun mtshams
(meditation in darkness), for one hundred nights. Teachings during the lo gsum are
based on the following works: the Ma rgyud cycle; Khrid yig dmar mo mdzub ishug
of Kun grol grags pa (b.1700); the bka'lung rgya mtsho, the De snod mdzod and
the bsKyed rdzogs lha gnyen shel gong by Shar rdza; the Bon rang lugs kyi khrid
gzhung du ma las brus pa'i byang chub lam gyi rim pa'i dmigs khrid gshen bstan
gsal ba'i sgron me (also known as Tshul chen lam rim) by Tshul chen Tshul khrims
bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan.
7. Educational exchange
gTso tshang Monastery has close ties with Togs ldan Monastery, the seat of
Bon slebs Nam mkha' bstan 'dzin. Thus Bon slebs sends educated monks to gTso
tshang to teach and g Tso tshang sends some of its young monks to rTogs Idan to
study, rGod po (No.92) and gTerri (No.97) used to be branch monasteries of gSer
gzhong Monastery.
8/9. Rituals
- 1st month, 3rd-5th day: celebration of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan's
anniversary during which the monks perform the dge spyod ritual and invite
mNyam med for the gling skor; the 6th day marks the beginning of smon lam
during which the bDe gshegs stong gi mtshan brjod is recited once a day. Ze
kha Monastery had their cham dance on the 8th day followed by the gtor
bzlog rite on the 9th day. Bya brang Monastery performed their 'cham on the
13th day, which was also followed by gtor bzlog rite. gSergzhong Monastery
exhibited its gos sku (a large embroidered tangkha) on the 15th day and its
smon lam ceremonies ended on the 16th day with the gtor hzlog rite.
- 3rd month, 1st-17th day: the Du tri su recitation practised, without
interruption, by the monks and lay people together (male and female alike);
participants must practise in silence (thun), while circumambulating the
monastery (skor ba) the whole time. The transmission (dbang) of the Du tri su
cycle is given on the 8th.
- 4th month, 7th-16th day: the mChod pa stong mchod ritual is performed
(7th-12th day: the stong mchod ritual in conjunction with the Klong rgyas
255



ceremony, 13th-16th day: the ceremony of fasting known as the smyung gnas
yar tshogs together with the dGe bsnyen lha Inga ritual).
- Sth month, 1st-15th day: the dbyar gnas ritual in which all the monks of
different grades, drang srong ba and gtsang gtsug pa must participate in the
great ritual known as Ma tri sgrub chen. The practitioners of the dbyar gnas
must also recite the Kun dbyings sku Inga 'i cho ga and the Pang skong once
a day. The transmission of the bzlog chog was given on the 16th day.
- 8th month, 1st-7th day: the ritual service (zhabs brtan sku rim), consisting
of one thousand bskang ba and tshogs for the tutelar (vi dam) and protective
deities (bka skyong) in conjunction with the ritual cycle of the deity gSang
drag, had to be completed withintat period. The ritual ended with the
performance of the srung zlog bsad gsum of the gSang drag cycle.
- 10th month, starting on the 26th day: seven-day ritual of the dBal gas cycle
with the 'cham dance on the 29th.
- 12th month, 21st-29th day: ritual known as dgu gtor during which the srung
zlog of the deity sTag la is performed.
In addition to the above-mentioned annual ceremonies there are monthly rituals
known as the Cho ga bcu gnyis, "The Twelve Rituals" sponsored by each of the
monks in turn:
dPal Idan dus 'khor in the 1st month
Byams ldan rgyal ba in the 2nd month
Kun dbyings sku Inga in the 3rd month
rNam dag byams ma in the 4th month
Kun rig sgron ma in the 5th month
dGe bsnyen lha inga in the 6th month
Kun gsal byams ma in the 7th month
Mon lam mtha'vas in the 8th month
gYung drung rnam 'joms in the 9th month
sMan bla in the 10th month
dGe spyod in the 11th month
rGyal ba rgya mtsho in the 12th month
10. Books held in the monastery
Seven copies of the Bonpo Canon (the second edition printed in Chengdu), one
copy of the Dran pa bka'thang in eight volumes, one copy of the Tshe dbang bka'
thang in four volumes, one copy of the Slob dpon bka'thang in four volumes, one
copy of the mKha' gro'i bka thang.
12. Local community
In the past the communities of three monasteries were organized, following the
256



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
traditional Tibetan military system, into three units (dmag ru), which, in the past,
functioned as military divisions during critical times and which were stationed in
open valleys: Nyin pa unit comprising Ra nang, Yang le, Dzari, Kha lung, Lag lab,
Gyi rong, IDong bzo and A ro, the manor villages of Ze kha Monastery: Srib pa unit
comprising mDa' lung, Yar sgur, Mar sgur, Bya brang, dPa' brgya, Bas skyes, sNgo
sngo and Nges sa, the manor villages of Bya brang Monastery (since the Bonpo
monastery in Kha ba'i klong was a branch monastery of Bya brang, its villages, as
well as half of Kha ba, Shug steng kha and Ri bo sgang also belonged to Bya brang
Monastery); sMad ma khag gsum unit comprising Chag sgo, Nyin lung kha, Shing
"bras, gSer gzhong, Ci nges nang, Kha nang, sGur mgo, Ban chung (no mention in
KBTL), Nyin srib, and gSer gzhong Monastery's villages. Altogether three hundred
and sixty families. All of them now belong to sTeng ka district (xiang) of The bo.
13. Local festivals
The mountain behind (rgyab ri) of Ze kha is called Ho ri. Mount Brag nag
behind Ho ri is the abode of the local deity Brag nag. The mountain range to the east
of Ze kha is called stag sgang and and is the rgyab ri of gTso tshang Monastery, and
the range to the west of Ze kha is called gZig sgang.
g Tso tshang Monastery is located at the foot of the stag sgang range and the la
btsas that was built at its summit with the help of Bon slebs Nam mkha' bstan'dzin
in 1986 is propitiated on the 13th day of the 4th month.
14. Occupation of the local people
Farmers, who, in the past, were organized into military units (see above
section). A wide variety of crops grow in the valley - Wheat, barley, beans, potatos,
peas, and maize. Most of the farmers also keep animals of some kind - cows,
horses, donkeys, mules, sheep and goats.
Sources
(1) Interviews with A skal and sTag tsha Kun grol on 26 August 1996 at the
monastery. A skal was a monk at Ze kha Monastery and was born in De bzo in
1932.
sTag tsha Kun grol was born in rNga khog in 1960. He is a monk at rTogs ldan
Monastery in Nga khog, and was sent to gTso tshang by Bon slebs Nam mkha'
bstan'dzin to teach the monks there and guide the three-year retreat (lo gsum).
On 29 August, I visited Nyi ma bstan 'dzin, a monk from gSer gzhong
Monastery, born in 1908, on account of his knowledge of the monastery's history,
Unfortunately, owing to his old age, he had lost much of his memory and could not
assist me.
(2) Texts:
257



- BHMT
- DBS
- KBTL
- KNGL
- KTSD
- TGLG
- TLPY
- ZNYZ
(92) rGod po Monastery
1. Name
There used to be a Bonpo monastery called Bya 'bab gser thang whose
foundation date and founder remain unknown, and which, according to oral
tradition, was forcefully converted to Buddhism, together with many other Bonpo
monasteries, when the Cone Chief conquered The bo (probably during the time
of Tshe dbang don grub (1642-1692), the ninth chief of Cone and Blo bzang don
grub, (7-1692), his successor (See DMCB pp.661-663; CNTK pp.372-373; ZNYZ
pp.41-55). Several monks, unwilling to submit, fled from the monastery and built a
new Bonpo monastery. Because they were considered rgod po "brave people", the
new monastery was called God po.
2. Location
God po Monastery is located in La rtsa khog district. The seat of the
district is mkhar steng, 95 km east of county town. The La rtsa chu is a small
northward-flowing tributary of The bo river. God po Monastery is located in Chas
ra village, on the east bank of the La rtsa chu, around 120 km from the county town,
the seat of The bo county (latitude 34°08'02''N, longitude 103°55'41"E).
3. History
Two articles written in Tibetan without any references to their sources say that
the monastery was built in ca. 1770 by g Yung drung bstan 'dzin, and that the first
lama of the monastery was born in mKhar steng village and was known as mKhar
steng Lama. His reincarnation was discovered twenty years after his death. There
were two assembly halls and sixty-three cells accomodating seventy-five monks in
the first half of the twentieth century (DBSJ p.101; TLPY pp.69-70). According to
oral tradition, a Lama from Shar khog rebuilt the monastery at the present site after
the monastery was destroyed by monks from a Buddhist monastery in Khar steng
when the lama of God po was still a child. At present the monastery is in a state of
258



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
disrepair.
7. Educational exchange
God po was a branch of gSer gzhong Monastery
12. Local people
There are fourteen families in Chas ra village.
14. Occupation of the local people
farming
Sources
(1) All the information besides the two articles mentioned above was collected from
an interview on 27 August 1996 with Blo bzang (b.1929) and Do rje (b.1923)
who were both monks at the monastery for a few years.
(93) Nags gong Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's real name is Sam 'grub, but since it is located at the foot of
Nags gong village it is locally known as Nags gong or Nags gong bSam 'grub dgon.
2. Location
Nags gong Monastery is located on north bank of the 'A zha river in 'Azha
valley, about 90 km southeast of the county town (latitude: 33°48'18"N, longitude
103041'58"E).
3. History
The monastery was founded in ca. 875 A.D. by skyang 'phags Nyi ma rgyal
'mtshan and is now a branch monastery of dGu skyang Monastery (No.196),
the main seat of dGu skyang Nyi ma rgyal mtshan. Prior to 1959, the monastery
comprised one assembly hall, and living quarters consisting of thirty-nine cells
accomodating fifty monks (DBSJ p. 101; TLPYP.69). It was rebuilt in 1991. At
present it comprises one assembly hall, the residence of the head lama, and ten cells.
When I visited the monastery, the assembly hall was under construction, but all
the monks were away performing a ritual at a private home. I found the head lama
of the monastery in Pe gseb village. He was born in 1968. He is not considered an
incarnation but was chosen a few years ago by the monks. Since he has been busy
with rebuilding the monastery, he has had little time to study and knows almost
259



nothing of the monastery's history, even though he is considered the most learned
person in the area.
5. Current number of monks
The monastery has twelve monks, five or six of whom live outside the
monastery with their families.
6. Current education
The head of the monastery is a young monk called bSod nams ye she. Since all
the monks are very young, they study mainly Tibetan and ritual practice under the
head master.
8/9. Rituals
The monks go to dGu skyang to perform the 'cham dance with the monks there
on the 13th day of the 3rd month. Occasionally, they also perform funerary rites and
rituals for health, fortune, abundant crops etc, in private homes at the behest of the
families.
12. Local community
The local lay community of the monastery consists of five villages: Nags gong
with twenty families, Pe gseb with thirty-eight families, Gro mang with twenty-two
families, dNgul ba with twelve families and sTag dpung with ten families (one
hundred and three people in total),
14. Occupation of the local people
Farming
(94) Chags ri Monastery
1. Name
Chags ri Monastery. Its formal name is dPal Idan g-yung drung gling.
2. Location
The monastery is situated on the east bank of sTag ra chu dkar river in sTag ra
valley (sTag ra district, Xiang), 60 km southeast of the county town (latitude: 33°51'
65"N, longitude: 103°22'06''E).
3. History
The monastery was founded by a chief of the mGo rje village named Tshe lung
260



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(or Tshe lhun) in ca. 1868. It was moved to another site but because of some sort of
threat to the monks' lives, the monastery was moved back to its original site. Later,
another disaster occured: three of the monks held up three horses belonging to the
chief of Cone for reasons that remain unexplained. The chief of Cone retaliated by
burning down the monastery. There is little information concerning the monastery's
history besides the fact that it was connected to A skyid skyang tshang Monastery
(No.194) in mDzod dge, and for this reason a monk of sk yang tshang called Dri
med 'od zer undertook the reconstruction of the monastery in 1993.
5. Current number of monks
At present there are thirty-two and novices monks living in the monastery
As head of the monastery, Dri med 'od zer visits the site every year to inspect the
reconstruction work and perform rituals.
7. Educational exchange
sKyang tshang Monastery of which it is a branch.
12. Local community
The local lay community of the monastery consists of six villages: mGo rje,
sGang leb, kun gtsang, Phu ba, mGo rtse and bSe shang. There are forty families
in mGo rje, thirty-four in sGang leb, eleven in Kun gtsang, twenty in mGo rtse, and
about twenty in bSe tshang.
13. Local festivals
There are three la btsas on Mount Ha mtsho the rgyab ri or mountain behind
the monastery: two la brsas at the top belonging to two of the villages, Khro bo and
sGang leb, and a common la btsas at the foot of the mountain propitiated by the
entire local lay community. All three la btsas are renewed on the same dates: 13th
day of the 1st month and the 13th day of the 4th month.
14. Occupation of the local people
Farming.
Sources:
(1) Interview In autumn of 1996 with: gYung drung 'gyur med (b.1935) and a monk
of the monastery
(2) Texts:
- BHMT
- DBSI
- KBTL
261



-
KNGL
- KTSD
- TLPY
- ZNYZ
(95) Shing skam Monastery
1. Name
The monastery was originally named Khis ri after an old village, but later it
came to be known as Shing skam Monastery, the name of the village where it was
located. The name is only known by its pronunciation and thus its exact meaning
remains obscure. Shing skam in Tibetan, if spelt the way it is pronounced, literally
means "dead tree"; this interpretation corresponds to one legend according to which
the monastery was built on a site where many trees died. The monastery is also
known as Kha ba lung, since it is situated in Kha ba lung.
The local Bonpo community simply calls it Kha ba lung, but it should not
be confused with the Buddhist monastery of the same name in the vicinity. To
distinguish them, the Buddhist monastery, which is located above the village, is
referred to as Kha ba lung dgon pa gong ma (upper Kha ba lung Monastery) and the
Bonpo monastery, which is located at the bottom of the village, as Kha ba lung dgon
pa 'gab ma (lower Kha ba lung Monastery) ('gab ma has the same meaning as zhol
ma in Amdo dialect). Some people also refer to the monastery as Shel sgo dgon pa
because it was the first monastery in the valley to have its windows fitted with glass
panes.
2. Location
Shing skam Monastery was situated near the Kha ba village of Kha ba district
(xiang), located 34 km east of county town, the seat The bo County (latitude: 33°58
78"N, longitude: 103°29'66"E).
3. History
The monastery seems to have been founded in 1466 (DBSI p.100; TLPY,
pp. 65-66). The original monastery was located on a slope in En 'dzi valley near a
Buddhist monastery. It was later moved by Tso ke don grub, the village chief, to its
present site near the village because its original location was too remote and made it
an easy target for thieves. The monastery was destroyed in 1958 and so far has not
been rebuilt nor has the reincarnation of its trulku been found. At present, the local
Bonpo community goes to other Bonpo monasteries in the area.
The monastery's lineage of masters ran for at least four generations, since the
262



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
names of four of the masters are mentioned: Nyi ma, Agsas, Blo bzang and Do rje
(DBSI p.100; TLPY pp.65-66).
12. Local community
There are more than fifty Bonpo families in Kha ba village which formerly
constituted the monastery's lay community.
14. Occupation of the local people
Farming
Sources:
(1) Interview with 'Od zer (b.1936), a monk at the Buddhist monastery. I could
not find anyone among the local Bonpo community who knew more about the
destroyed monastery.
(96) Sam 'grub Monastery
1. Name
gYung drung bsam 'grub dgon
2. Location
The monastery is situated about 55 km from the county town of The bo, in the
center of Kha ba Township, at the confluence of Nya len black river and Myi chen
river which flows southwards to the bo valley,
3. History
Three lamas, Shes rab dbang phyug, rGyal mtshan and Nya le bla ma, from
three different hermitages, came together and founded bSam 'grub Monastery in ca.
1395. It is not clear how and when this occurred but the monastery is affiliated to A
skyid syang tshang Monastery (No.194) in mDzod dge. Until the nineteen-fifties
the monastery comprised an assembly hall, thirty-three cells, and housed
seventy-seven monks. The monastery had a series of masters as follows:
1. Gyal ba, from Myi che ba village, he was also the lama of another Bonpo
monastery called Shes rab Monastery.
2. Chos 'byor rgyal ba
3. Sam gtan rgyal ba
4. Shes rab dngos grub
5. Nya len Bla ma
6. Gyal mtshan of Myi che ba village
263



7. Nam mkha'rgyal mtshan
8. Tshul khrims rgyal mtshan from Nyin srib village at sTeng ka in The bo,
travelled to Central Tibet to receive teachings and then returned to secular
life in Kong po
9. A monk of the Myi che ba village, name is unknown.
10. Rin chen nor bu of Myi che ha village
11. Ye shes tshul khrims of Mirgod kha village
12. bsTan 'dzin dbang rgyal of Myi che ba village; he travelled twice to Central
Tibet to study and receive teachings, and became a renowned teacher when
he returned to the monastery.
13. skal bzang 'jam dpal of Myi che ba village; according to legend, he went to
Lhasa, India and Hongkong to study, and was renowned as a sculptor.
14. dNgos grub tshogs pa of Nya len pa village, was a renowned teacher and
artist (he executed the murals in the previous assemly hall). He died in
1958
15. bs Tan 'dzin rgyal mtshan, the present master of the monastery. He is
currently rebuilding the monastery. Permission to rebuild the monastery
was obtained in 1981 and work began in 1982. An assembly hall and
forty-one cells have been rebuilt.
7. Educationa exchange
Since the monastery is a branch monastery of A skyid skyang tshang
Monastery, Dri med 'od zer, a reincarnation from A skyid Kyang tshang, regularly
visits the monastery to inspect the work and to give teachings. However, the monks
are currently busy with the reconstruction rather than studying.
8/9. Rituals
- The smon lam festival from the 6th to the 16th day of the 1st month, and the
dbyar gnas retreat from 15th to 21st of the 6th month. An annual 'cham dance
is performed on the 8th and 9th days of the 1st month during the smon lam
festival
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery possesses complete copies of the Bonpo bka' gyur and bka
rten.
11. Income and expenses
Economic circumstances of the monastery depends on offerings made
by disciples. The government has given ten thousand Chinese Yuan for the
reconstruction of the monastery. Account for offerings has never been done.
264



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
12. Local community
The local community of the monastery consists of three large villages, Nya len,
Nyin ga'i kha and Myi che pa, altogether seventy-three families.
13. Local festivals
On the summit of the mountain behind the monastery are three la btsas, all
three named after gSas mkhar lha ri snying po and propitiated twice a year, on the
11th day of the 4th month and the 11th day of the 11th month.
14. Occupation of the local people
Agriculture
Sources:
(1) Interviews in autumn of 1996 with: Pad kho (b.1926), who spent several years as
a monk in the monastery, was born in Nya-len village; bSod nams (b.1937) was
born in Myi che ba village.
(2) Texts
- BHMT
- DBSJ
- KBTL
- KNGL
- KTSD
- TLPY
(97) gTerri Moanstery
1. Name -
The monastery was called g Ter ri, the "hill of hidden treasures", because a
cymbal (sbub chol) was discovered at the site on which it was built.
2. Location
The monastery is located near Tshong dus village, on the east bank of En
dzi river in En 'dzi valley of Kha ba district (xiang) in The bo County, about 50 km
from the seat of the county (latitude: 34°06'55"N, longitude: 103°25'61"E).
3. History
The monastery appears to have been founded in 1524 by Blo bzang don grub, a
reputable lay person (DBSJ p.100; TLPY p.66). According to legend, shortly after its
foundation the monastery fell into decline. Two lamas from gSer gzhong Monastery
265



came to look after it, as it was a branch monastery of gSer gzhong. The complex
comprised one assembly hall, one temple and living quarters housing more than
twenty monks (DBSJ p.100; TLPY p.66). The monastery was destroyed during the
Cultural Revolution. It has not been rebuilt and the Bonpo people living in the area
go to the local rNying ma pa monastery for their religious affairs.
8/9. Rituals
The smon lam prayer ceremony at the beginning of the 1st month was
performed in conjunction with gSer gzhong Monastery. There was the 'cham dance
on the 11th day of the 11th month
12. Local community
The local lay community of the monastery consists of six villages: ITag ga
kha, Nyi ri kha, Be ri kha, 'Og sa kha, Tshong 'du and gNyan bza' (more than thirty
families in total).
13. Local festivals
The local people celebrate the renewal of the la btsas dedicated to the local
deity of Mount Sa dkar on the 1st day of the 4th month. The la btsas is situated at
the top of the mountain behind the monastery
14. Occupation of the local people
Farming
Sources
(1) Interviews with: IH ba, born in 1932; A skal, a monk from Ze kha Monastery,
born in 1932
(2) Texts:
- BHMT
- DBS
- KBTL
- KNGL
- KTSD
- TLPY
- ZNYZ
266



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
(98) r Tswa ring (also rТsa ring, rТsa ri, Tsa ri) Monastery
1. Name
The formal name of the monastery is Gyal myi gYung drung dmu ri.
2. Location
The monastery is situated near Zur lung kha village in Nyin ngo district (xiang)
of The bo County, 56 km east of the county-town, the seat the county (latitude: 34°
05'64"N, longitude: 103°34'58"E).
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of ten villages:
1) Lung yul kha with eleven families (KTSD p.47 and KBTL, p.39: Lung 8-ye
kha)
2) gTer yul kha with thirty-five families (KTSD p.47: Ting g-ye kha; KBTL
p.47: rTig g-ye kha).
3) rDzong tsa kha with forty-five families (KTSD p.47: dKyil bcugs kha).
4) Nyin la kha with nine fimilies.
5) Zur lung kha with seventeen families.
6) Yar ru kha with twenty-eight families (KTSD p.47 and KBTL p.39. Ya ru
kha).
7) Srib ga kha with eighteen families.
8) Gad srang kha with seven families (KBTL p. 39: Sked srib).
9) gDong ga kha with twenty-two families.
10) Khog sde kha with nineteen families (KTSD p. 47: Khog steng kha).
13. Local festivals
Mount Muri, which is the mountain behind (rgyab ri) the monastery, is the
site for celebration of the renewal of the la btsas. The propitiation takes place on the
15th day of the 4th month.
14. Occupation of the local people
Mostly agriculture.
267



268
Co-ne County
The - bo
County
khog's Forestry Center
841-a
Nyan-bza
D
fam-'xtub
etswerine
Mi che rya-ne
steng-ba-don
a
Tse-tahan
steng-ka
Box-fap.UTV
Bya
-baba
c-bp
chu-nag
Kha på
Nyinfogo
Ye-sgang
Bra
dBang-bzan
•
o
County Seat
District Seat
7
0
("Brog-cha)
.
@
sTug-ra Forestry Center
sTag-ra
STag
y Chags-ri
"Brug-chu County
Township Seat
Administrative Village
Monastery
County Border
Township Border
River
Road
1/630,000



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(91) Tso Ishang Monastery
(All the photos. (91) through (217), were taken by Tsering Thar, unless otherwise noted.)
(93) Nags gong Monastery
269



(94) Chags ri Monastery
(96) Sam 'grub Monastery
270



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
(98) rTswa ring Monastery
271



bSang chu County
(99) rTse zhig Monastery
1. Name
Tse zhig Monastery or gYung drung bon bstan 'phel rgyas gling is also called
rTse dbus Monastery. rTse zhig belongs to the group of nine or eighteen great Bonpo
tribes in Amdo known as Zhig (zhig chen dgu dang yang na bco brgyad).
2. Location
rTse zhig is the only Bonpo monastery in Sang chu (it also known as Xia
he in Chinese) County of Kan lho (Gan nan) Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture, and
is situated in rTa khra'i gzhung, 30 km north of the county town where Bla brang
Monastery is located
3. History
The monastery was founded by sGom chen gYyung drung rgyal mtshan, he is
also called sTong nyid bya 'phur. His principal teacher was Zhu sgom 'phrul zhig
chen po (KTGN p.8), a son of Zhu skye se chen po. The teaching lineage may be
traced back to Zhu yas legs po, a famous disciple of gShen chen Klu dga'. Sras
Tha rje skyid po was a disciple of Zhu yas legs po and the teacher of Zhu skye se
chen po; Gongs mdzod ri khrod chen po, another disciple of Zhu skye se chen
po, was a contemporary of Zhu sgom 'phrul zhig chen po. dGongs mdzod ri khrod
chen po was born in the the Earth-Tiger year of the first Rab byung (1038). Since
dGongs mdzod ri khrod chen po and Zhu sgom 'phrul zhig chen po were both
contemporaries of sTong nyid bya 'phur who founded the monastery (TZLD p.4,
KTGN p.8), we may assume that the monastery was built at least nine hundred
years ago. From the time of sTong nyis bya 'phur, the monastery was run by a
continuous succession of abbots for about five hundred years until the 10th Rab
byung (1567-1626) after which the monastery split into two branches: one headed
by dGarba Bla ma gYung drung rgyal mtshan regarded as a reincarnation of stong
nyid bya 'phur, and the other by rTse zhig A lags Shes rab. Even the ritual objects
(mchod chas) of the monastery were divided among the two Bla brang. In addition
to the rTse zhig Chos rje, there were three Bla brang which came to be known as
Nang chen gsum, the "three residences of the Bla mas". dar ba Bla ma g Yung
drung rgyal mtshan went to study at sMan ri Monastery (No. 1). He returned to rTse
zhig Monastery where he taught for many years and became famed as a teacher
throughout the whole of Amdo. Unfortunately, his reincarnation passed away in
childhood. The next incarnation was found in a child born in Tong chung, Ba yan,
northern Amdo (Hua long county in Qinghai). He does not seem to have lived at
272



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
rTse zhig but to have remained in the Ba yan area where he greatly contributed to
the spread of Bon and was locally known as Tong chung Zhabs drung (TZLD p.6).
The following incarnation was Zhabs drung bSod nams g-yung drung dbang
rgyal (1894-1949) who was very active on both the religious and political scenes in
Amdo in the early 20th century (cf. To shes Temple, No. 118). His reincarnation is
skal bzang bstan'dzin rgya mtsho (also known as A mgon bla ma or A lags Pad ma)
who was born in the Iron-Tiger year of the 16th Rab byung (1950) into the m on
rgya family of A mgon tribe in Amdo, and who is the present rTse dbus tshang
(TZLD p.5). A lags Shes rab, a contemporary of Gar ba bla ma gYung drung rgyal
mtshan founded a separate Bla brang and visited almost all the Bonpo monasteries
in Amdo. In addition to the Bla brang, he built a three-storey I Ha khang at Khyung
mo Monastery (No. 123). Rab 'byams pa Shes rab rnam rgyal, A lags Shes rab's
nephew, was sent as a child to sMan ri Monastery to study under Rin chen Ihun grub
and Grub thob Nam mkha' hun grub, and after several years he obtained the Rab
'byams pa degree. Unwilling to return to Amdo, he remained there for most of his
life. His uncle, disappointed, concealed the rTen gsum (three types of sacred objects,
viz, images, books and stupas) inside some statues. Later however A khu Gyal ba, a
disciple of A lags Shes rab from sTong che in Khri ka, went to Manri Monastery to
beg Shes rab mam rgyal to return and take his uncle'e place. He accepted and before
leaving dPal Idan ye shes, the sixth Panchen Bla ma, gave him a gold seal and an
official letter giving him authority over all the Bonpo monasteries and communities
in Amdo (KTGN p.9, TZLD p.9). According to TGLR, he was the seventeenth abbot
of the monastery in the 12th Rab byung. (1687-1746). His reincarnation died in
childhood. The following incarnation was Nam mkha' g-yung drung, an extremely
learned Bla ma. Like his predecessors he was invested with authority over all the
Bonpo monasteries in Amdo. He died at the age of eighty. Nam mkha' g-yung
drung's reincarnation also died in childhood. The following incarnation was rTse
zhig Khri chen Theg mchog ye shes. He studied under r'Tse zhig gYung drung bstan
rgyas, Ches rjerGyal ba tshul khrims, sBra ser Nam mkha' dbang phyug and Nga
ba'i rTogs Idan Tshul khrims ye shes and specialized in the paractice of Mra seng
dkar po. He looked after the Bonpo monasteries mainly around Khri ka, Reb gong
and rTse zhig, and repaired the Tshogs chen 'du khang and the thirteen lHa khang
of Khyung mo Monastery. Theg mchog ye shes's reincarnation was Khri ba kun
bzang rgyal mtshan. Like his predecessors, he too was responsible for all Bonpo
monasteries in Amdo. He died in the thirty-first year of the 16th Rab byung (1957).
The following incarnation was a nephew of rTse zhig Bla ma Drung ram pa Shes rab
ram rgyal. He was very bright and studied many years at Bla brang Monastery, but
died young. rTse zhig 'Gyur med kun bzang rgya mtsho, the following incarnation
was a nephew and disciple of the Drung ram pa. Both he and his uncle counted
several remarkable students among their disciples, such as So nag Grub chen thog
273



'dzin (see So nag gsas khang), Bon brgya sPal mkhar rgyal ba (see Mag gsar
Temple, No.102) and mKhar nag grub chen of Khyung mo Monastery (KTGN
p. 11-12, TZLD p.11-12).
The next incarnation was rTse zhig gYung drung bstan rgyas who died at the
age of seventy. He had several renowned followers including Bon brgya Rang shar
rig grol and Khri chen Theg mchog ye shes. The next reincarnation was discovered
in a child from Kho nag but he disappeared shortly after and as a result people
believe that he was not the true reincarnation. The Bla ma's third residence (Nang
chen gsum pa) was built by the rTse zhig Chos rje Rin po che, Gyal ba Tshul khrims
bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan, who was born in Wood-Hare Year of the 13th Rab byung
(1795). He was a nephew and pupil of Tse zhig Nam mkha' g-yung drung, and
became in turn the master of Gar ba bla ma g Yung drung bstan 'dzin. He was an
assiduous practitioner all his life, and is supposed to have meditated in more than
five hundred remote and wild places (gnyan sa), and wrote many works including
commentaries on gSang gcod yid bzhin nor bu 'i chu 'grim dmigs skor, 'Grel ba
mkha' 'gro'i zhal lung, Srung ma'i sgrub thabs, gYang sgrub 'phrin bcol, Nyams
mgur, Zhal gdams, Blo sbyong, etc. He developed close ties with 'Jigs med skal
bzang rgya mtsho, a Nying ma pa from De dge with whom he exchanged teachings
and thus also became popular among the rNying ma pa community. Chin wang Chos
rgyal bSod nams dar rgyas, seems to be a contemporary chief of Mongolian tribes,
gave him the title of Chos rje and appointed him his official spiritual preceptor. Both
Bon brgya Rang shar rig grol and sBra ser Nam mkha' dbang phyug, two important
figures of that period were his disciples. He died in the Wood-Dog Year of the 15th
Rab byung (1874). There are three reincarnation lineages of Chos rje Rinpoche
representing his body, speech and mind. The first body incarnation was Chos rje
Tshul khrims 'od zer, born in the Wood-Pig Year of the 15th Rab byung (1875). He
studied under Khri ba Theg mchog ye shes and Pan ti ta Kun bzang rgyal mtshan,
and practised mainly gSang gcod yid bzhin nor bu. He died in the Wood-Pig Year
of the 16th Rab byung (1935). The reincarnation of Chos rje Tshul khrims 'od zer
was Chos rje Tshul khrims Ihun 'grub (also known as Shes rab g-yung drung bstan
pa'i sgron me), the third son of Zhabs drung bSod nams g.yung drung dbang rgyal.
He was born in the Earth-Tigre Year of the 16th Rab byung (1938). Following his
father's wishes, he studied under skyang sprul Lung rtogs skal bzang rgya mtsho but
unfortunately he died in the Earth-Dog Year of the 16th Rab byung (1958) at the age
of twenty.
The reincarnation of g Yung drung Ihun grub is Shes rab bstan pa'i zla ba, born
in the Iron-Dog Year of the 16th Rab byung (1970) to the rTse dbus bla ma family.
His father, sNgags bon Shes rab blo gros, was the eldest son of Tse dbus A lags
and Kun bzang 'tsho. He took his monk's vows from Gya 'obs Rinpoche of sNang
zhig Monastery and entered rTse zhig Monastery in 1983. He was recognized as the
274



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
incarnation of rTse zhig chos rje g Yung drung Ihun grub by Gya 'obs Rinpoche,
Bon blon Nam mkha' bstan'dzin and, more especially, by Bon brgya dGe legs Thun
grub rgya mtsho, and thus became the fourth rTse zhig chos rje and present head bla
ma of rTse zhig Monastery.
Chos rje Rinpoche's first speech incarnation was Chos rje bsTan pa 'od zer or
Ba lung chos rje who was born into the Ba lung family of the Mar nang khag gsum
("three tribes of Mar nang"), he spent all his life practising Dzogs chen and gCod
in caves. The next incarnation was born at To shes in Ba yan (no further information
available)
Chos rje Rinpoche's first mind incarnation was Bon brgya g Yung drung phun
tshogs mkhas grub 'jigs med, a disciple and nephew of Bon brgya Rang shar rig
grol. He also studied under Kun bzang rgyal mtshan (sTong che), Gya 'obs bstan pa
rab rgyas, rTogs Idan Tshul khrims bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan as well as other masters
of different religious traditions, and became learned in all disciplines and aspects
of Tibetan culture. He gave many dbang and lung at rTse zhig, sTong che and Reb
gong, and was especially revered by the Reb gong bon mang (tantric practitioners
of Reb gong) as their main teacher. He restored Bon brgya Monastery (No.100). He
had eight monks and about a hundred sNgags pa as his main pupils including Bon
brgya Nam mkha'rgyal mtshan, r Togs Idan dkon mchog sprul sku, s Tong chung
zhabs drung, sBra ser sprul sku, sTong nyams snang gsal lhun grub, 'Bum pa. Rig
'dzin kun bzang klong grol. He died at the age of sixty.
The next and present mind reincarnation is Bon brgya dGe legs Ihun grub
rgya mtsho, born to the Khyung family. In his childhood he studied under Bon
brgya Nam mkha'rgyal mtshan as well as syang sprul Lung rtogs skal bzang rgya
mtsho and received many initiations and transmissions (dbang). He rebuilt Bon
brgya Monastery. Like the previous bla mas of rTse zhig, in addition to Bon brgya
Monastery, his main seat and residence, he is also responsible for Khyung mo,
rTse zhig, Dung dkar monasteries, the Reb gong Bon mang, Khri ka and Ser brgya,
as well as all the Bonpo lay communities of the area. In the nineteen-eighties he
undertook the reconstruction of Khyung mo Monastery and its Bla brang prior to the
enthronement of the Khyung mo sTobs Idan dbang phyug, the main reincarnation
of Khyung mo Monastery. In Bon brgya Monastery, he rebuilt the 'du khang, lha
khang, bla brang, and some of the reliquary mchod rten. He acquired three copies
of the Bonpo bka''gyur and more than one thousand volumes of various Tibetan
works. He is one of the most learnt Bonpo scholars in present Tibet.
5. Current number of monks
One reincarnate bla ma and fifty-six monks lived in the monastery in the
first half of the twentieth century (TGLR p.6). At present there are more than
thirty-monks



6. Current education
The present educational system is as before: the monks are divided into groups
according to their level and study under one teacher, in addition to performing
regular rituals. For obvious reasons (see above), rTse zhig chos rje is the main
teacher, Gya 'obs Rinpoche and Bon brgya Rinpoche are revered as the spiritual
masters by all the monks.
7. Educational exchange
Occasionally the monastery invites teachers from sNang zhig Monastery
(No. 180). Traditionally, the Bonpo communities in rGan gya, Reb gong, Khri ka
and Ba yan followed the masters of the rTse zhig lineage who have always been
active throughout the area. Consequently Bon brgya dGe legs lhun grub rgya mtsho,
undoubtedly the most erudite Bonpo scholar of the rTse zhig lineage, and probably
in the whole of Amdo, is the main teacher and spiritual master of the region.
8/9. Rituals
The smon lam in 1st month together with the anniversary of mNyam med Shes
rab rgyal mtshan during which the thousand epithets of the Buddha are recited,
Phyag mchod tshogs bsags, and the ritual of mKha' 'gro gsang gcod yid bzhin nor
bu; Gyal ba rgya mtsho, Du tri su and dbyar gnas in summer; Nam par rgyal ba'i
stong mchod in autumn; dBal gsas bsnyen sgrub with las mtha'srung bzlog and gar
'cham in winter. There are rituals of Kun rig, Kun dbyangs, Man bla, Dus 'khor,
rNam 'joms, Bla ma rtsa sgrub and Dug Inga rang grol.
Other rituals include the gso sbyong performed on the 1st, 8th, roth, 13th of
each month and dgu gtor on the 29th day of the last month of the year. Since the
monastery was mainly a sgrub sde (tantric group) for many generations, it has
inherited a rich tradition of rituals and there are about one hundred and fifty ritual
days in the year.
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery possesses a copy of the Bon po bka''gyur, Dri med gzi brjid as
well as Khams chen and more than two hundred volumes in total.
13. Local festivals
The mountain behind the monastery is called IHa btsun dkar po or Nga'i kha,
and is propitiated on the 11th day of the 4th month. There are two la btsas near the
monastery. The two la btsas represent rGan gya'i A myes dga' bo and bra shis
dbang chen dgra'dul. The former is propitiated on the 9th day of the 5th month,
and the latter on the 4th day of the same month. There are two rlung rta which are
dMar yag rlung rta and Seng ge rlung rta, the former is propitiated on the 7th day of
276



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
the 8th month and the latter on the 15th day of the 6th month. The main difference
between a la brsas and a rlung rta is that the top of the life-pole of a rlung rta is
adorned with a flag of Gyal mtshan rtse mo, whereas that of a la btsas is adorned
with feathers, otherwise the bsang offering and invocation of the deities are basically
identical in both instances.
Nearby the monastery, there is a sacred mountain called Brag dkar bya rgod.
There were three texts concerning Brag dkar bya rgod: the long version by skyang
'phags, the intermediate version by Gyal ba blo gros, and the short version by
rGyal dbang (NBBK p.122). According to legend, there are self-originated images of
rDzogs sku mkha''gying dkar po at the top of the mountain. Twenty Maha Pantita
are supposed to have meditated in twenty sacred meditation caves scattered all over
the mountain. Li shu stag ring is supposed to have concealed treasures in the white
rock, Gyim tsha rma chung in the blue rock to the North, Legs tang rmang po in the
red rock to the West, Dran pa nam mkha' in the green rock, and there is a guardian
deity for every treasure. There is the meditation cave of skyang bza' yig rtsis ma,
and the caves of skyang 'phags and gTso 'phags. The mountain's numerous holy
sites are believed to be especially beneficial against gnyan type diseases. The
mountain is also considered a favourable place to practise the four good rgyud,
especially the mKha' 'gro gsang gcod. Surrounding the mountain is an outer
circumambulatory path (phyi skor) and an inner circumambulatory path (nang skor)
and it is deemed especially auspicious to circumambulate the moutain three times, in
the Horse, Sheep, Bird and Monkey years.
Hor btsun bsTan 'dzin blo gros rgya mtsho, the author of NBBK, the dkar chag
of the mountain, meditated on the mountain for fifteen years during which he says
he was very happy. He had planned to write the dkar chag for a long time and finally
composed it in 1964 at the request of skal bzang ye shes, bSod nams rgyal mtshan
and Blo bzang rgya mtsho.
14. Occupation of the local people
Nomads who breed mainly yaks and sheep for a livelihood, and horses for
transportation.
Sources
(1) Interview in autumn of 1996 with: Shes rab bstan pa'i zla ba (b.1970), the fourth
reincarnation of rTse dbus chos rje of the monastery.
(2) Texts:
- TZLD
- NBBK
- KTGN
- TGLR
277



278
Ka-chu County
Nya'-gong brag-dkar
mkhaneyung-draag
"Gan-ky t lanaga
Tse-thig
|
Mar-thang
Bla-brang
Bang-dkar-thang
mTsho-sngon
Thang-dkar-nang
i
bsang - chu County
Xia he) gTSO
County Seat
Township Seat
Administrative Village
Monastery
County Border
Township Border
River
Road
Footpath
1/840,000



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
L
ILLE LETTER BILLED
(99) Tse zhig Monastery
279



Reb gong
Introduction
Reb gong represents a fairly large agricultural area: sheltered by the
surrounding mountains, it enjoys a climate favourable to cultivation. The geography
of the region however makes travel conditions difficult and the villages, which,
for the most part, are scattered in the hills, are not easily accessible. The religious
community of the area is composed of three distinct groups: Boupo, rNying ma pa
and de lugs pa. The Bonpo community consists of Bon brgya Monastery, fifteen
village temples known as gsas khang and their adherents.
Since the Reb gong bon mang and Bon brgya Monastery share the same
history, there is no need to repeat it here. Unfortunately, there is little information
regarding the history of the fifteen gsas khang, probably owing to the spread and
increasing influence of the monastic system. As a result Bon brgya Monastery
has been the focus of attention, whereas the gsas khang, whose importance has
decreased in recent centuries, and which now merely function as a gathering place
for practitioners, have not been the subject of any kind of written record. The gsas
khang of Reb gong are divided into four groups:
(1) Yar nang bon mang comprising:
- Bon brgya gSang sngags dar rgyas gling (Bon brgya village)
- Mag gsar g-yung drung bstan dar gling (Mag gsar village)
Practitioners of these two gsas khang are descendents of Khyung po bs Tan
pa dar rgyas, a famous practitioner in local history. Traditionally, the two villages
do not participate in the spring ritual (dpyid cho) and the autumn ritual (ston cho)
of the Reb gong bon mang. The last Bon brgya Tulku attempted to enroll them but
was not very successful. Yar nang bon mang used to include a third gsas khang
for the gDung nges village known as the gDung nges grub pa kun 'dul gling, in
mDo ba village in the lower reaches of Bon brgya valley, and the three gsas khang
were collectively known as Yar nang bon sde khag gsum. However, since most
of the gDung nges families converted to Buddhism (at present only five Bonpo
practitioners and eight Bonpo families remain in the village) the gsas khang was not
rebuilt.
(2) sTod phyogs bon mang in the east of Reb gong comprising:
- Theg chen bon 'khor lhun grub gling (rGya mtsho dpal or A rga steng
village)
- gSang sngags rig 'dzin dar rgyas gling (Gad pa skya bo village)
- Theg chen smin grol rgya mtsho gling (gDong mgo village)
These three gsas khang were the seats of Grub chen "Khor los bsgyur ba'i rgyal
po, one among the first masters who came to Reb gong in order to spread the Bon
religion, and the practitioners are considered to be his spiritual descendents.
280



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
- Gyal bstan ye shes rgya mtsho gling (Ngo mo village)
- Rig 'dzin thugs rje byang chub gling (Gyang ru village)
These two gsas khang were the seats of Grub chen Ye shes mtsho rgyal, another
among the first masters who came to Reb gong to spread the Bon religion, and the
practitioners are his spiritual descendents. It is said that in the thirteenth century
Gyang ru Rig 'dzin thugs rje suppressed the evil spirit of a deceased monk in Ra
rgya Monastery so the monks could continue living there. Morever, he is said to
have been the rus dpon (family priest) of g Tsang Pan ti ta, the head master of gTsang
Monastery in Amdo and was greatly revered by the community.
(3) Mad phyogs bon mang comprising the five following gsas khang in the
northeast of Reb gong:
- mDo sngags phun tshogs dar rgyas gling (Gling rgya village)
- Kun 'dus g-yung drung 'gyur med gling (Zho 'ong nyin tha village)
- Grub pa'i rgyal mtshan mi 'gyur gling (Dar grong village)
- Khyung dkar rig 'dzin smin grol gling (Khyung bo thang village)
- gSang sngags bdud 'dul Ihun grub gling (sDong skam village)
Togs Idan Kun bzang klong grol and his son sNang gsal hun grub were born
there in the fifteenth century, and as spiritual descendents of the famous practitioner
Grub chen Khyung dkar tshang ba they greatly contributed to the spread of Bon in
the region.
(4) sNyan bzang bon mang comprising the three gsas khang in the north of Reb
gong:
- gSang chen smin grol dpal Idan gling (Hor nag village)
- Rig 'dzin kun 'dus ram rgyal gling (s Tong che village)
Since sTong che village and sTong che village of Khri ka share the same origin,
the Bonpos of the former are disciples of Khyung mo sTobs Idan dbang phyung, the
head master of Khyung mo Monastery in sTong che in Khri ka who has a throne in
the gsas khang of sTong che in Reb gong.
- Khyung dkar bstan pa rgya mtsho gling (Khyung bo la ga village)
This last gsas khang is very old although its date and founder remain unknown.
All the above-mentioned gsas khang are referred collectively to as the Reb
gong bon mang's one thousand and nine hundred holders of the Phur pa (Reb gong
bon mang phur thogs stong dang dgu brgya). Bon brgya Trulku dGe legs lhun grub
rgya mtsho is the master of all the Reb gong bon mang. Stod phyogs and sMad
phyogs are the Reb gong bon mang's two largest groups. The two gsas khang of the
Yar nang bon mang group function independently, not only from the rest of the Reb
gong bon mang, but also from one another, and do not participate in any of the other
group's collective activities. sNyan bzang bon mang joins Mad phyogs bon mang
for major religious activities. Thus for the main ceremonies, the four groups of Reb
gong merge into two groups under the leadership of stod phyogs bon mang and



sMad phyogs bon mang.
The rituals celebrated by the Reb gong bon mang may be divided into four
categories:
(1) Two major annual rituals celebrated collectively by the entire Reb gong bon
mang with the exception of Yar nang bon mang: the spring ritual (5th to
8th day of the 1st month) and the autumn ritual (8th to 10th day of the 10th
month).
The preparations take one day so the practitioners gather on the day before,
and those (especially the elderly) living in the remoter villages usually arrive a day
before that and spend the night with families near the gsas khang where the ritual
is to take place. The main practice is that of the dBal gsas cycle, as well as a short
version of the 'Bum pa and sTag la ritual cycles. Each of the gsas khang hosts the
rituals on a rotational basis. The gsas khang of Reb gong bon mang are conceived
of and function as a whole, rather than as separate institutions, and share a common
hierarchical system: two dge bskos, disciplinarian appointed for one year, one dbu
mdzad, incantation master appointed for three years, one khri pa, leader and one
gnyer pa, a treasurer appointed for one year, and one g-yung drung slob dpon, an
officiator who is replaced every three years. One of the dge bskos must belong to
the stod phyogs bon mang, and the other from sMad phyogs bon mang, these two
groups being the largest of the Reb gong bon mang's four groups. In addition, there
is one dbu mdzad who leads the chanting during ceremonies. The khri pa is the head
of the whole Bon mang, and is also responsible for organizing the spring ritual while
the gnyer pa is responsible for organizing the autumn ritual. During the rituals the
throne of the khri pa is placed at the same level as that of Bon brgya Trulku. Even in
his absence, the khri pa is honoured by the presence of his throne. The g-yung drung
slob dpon is responsible for every ritual.
(2) The next major ceremony is the ritual dedicated to the Yi dam Kun 'dus
which takes place from the 10th to the 13th day of the 5th month. The gsas
khang host the ritual in turn. Participants must be over twenty-nine years
old. The dbu mdzad for this ritual is selected for three years. The g-yung
drung slob dpon and khri pa are the same as for the above-mentioned
rituals. A separate gnyer pa is also appointed since the organiztion of the
ritual requires a considerable amount of time and effort.
(3) The third category comprises the mKha' 'gro gsang good and Zhi khro. The
former is held from the 1st to the 4th day of the 4th month, and the latter
from the 1st to the 4th day of the 5th month. The two rituals are performed
by both the stod phyogs bon mang and the sMad phyogs bon mang
separately (see below). Other rituals performed by the groups separately
include rituals dedicated to Tshe dbang, Kun bzang, dBal gsas and 'Bum
pa (25th - 30th day of the 11th month), performed by the stod phyogs bon
282



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
mang, and rituals dedicated to Kun bzang, Tshe dbang and dBal gsas (17th -
20th day of the 10th month), performed by the Mad phyogs bon mang.
The three-year dbu mdzad cycle dedicated to Yi dam kun 'dus ritual must be led
by the dbu mdzad of one of the two ritual groups of Reb gong Bon mang to which
he belongs, and the other group ought to find another one to be the dbu mdzad for
themeselves. They also ought to find two new gnyer pa for the two groups. Both
groups do not have a leader (khri pa) nor a ritual master (g-yung drung slob dpon)
for the rituals they perform.
These rituals do not require the presence of the khri pa and g-yung drung slob
dpon, but the khri pa of Reb gong bon mang must be honoured by his throne, and
two experienced practitioners are selected to occupy the first two seats of the front
row and to take on the role of the g-yung drung slob dpon.
(4) The fourth category of ritual includes those performed by the gsas khang
individually. All the gsas khang perform a ritual on the 10th of each
month, in addition to other rituals on different dates that are listed in the
descriptions of the gras khang below.
The position of each practitioner in the collective rituals of the Reb gong bon
mang is very important. I will describe here the order I observed when I attended the
spring ritual in 1998 at the gsas khang of Hor nag la ga village.
The two front rows and their tables are always very attractive during rituals.
The two bang kha occupy the first two seats at the head of the front row: bang
kha is supposed to be a Zhang zhung word for master of the sphere (Tib. dkyil
'khor gyi bdag po). One of them must be the sgrub dpon, the ritual's consultant
or advisor. Prior to the nineteen-fifties, the two bang kha had to guard the gtor ma
representing the tutelary deities (vi dam) and protective deities (bon skyong) placed
on the table between the thrones of Bon brgya Trulku and the khi pa day and night,
but at present their presence is required only during the day. The two bang kha must
be experienced tantric practitioners, and are therefore usually elderly personages
respected by the whole community. The dbu mdzad and g-yung drung slob dpon sit
in the center of the two front rows. The dbu mdzad's seat is higher than the others
but lower than the thrones of the Trulku and the khri pa. The seats between the two
bang kha at the head of the row and the dbu mdzad and g-yung drung slob dpon in
the middle are reserved for the elder practitioners, usually former officials of the Reb
gong bon mang with a reputation as experienced and powerful tantric practitioners,
The seats between the g-yung drung slob dpon and dbu mdzad in the center and
the musicians at the end of the row are occupied by those who chant best. The
rows behind are occupied by the other practitioners. New practitioners attend the
ceremony from the back seats.
The ritual is followed by the sde 'bod, invitation of the village, during which
the villagers invite the practitioners to their homes to perform rituals for their
283



families. These include purification rituals for the past year and the calling of
fortune and happiness for the coming year. The family welcomes the practitioners
by blowing trumpets and Chinese bamboo flutes, and by firing firecrackers. The
practitioners, led by the dbu mdzad, perform the rituals inside each house. Each visit
lasts around ten or fifteen minutes. The family offers the officiants a single fruit,
usually an apple, as a symbolic offering. Since the villagers wait several years for
this occasion, the practitioners must perform the sde bod regardless of the time it
takes (sometimes the visits are not completed until well after dark).
Since Bon brgya Trulku is the head of both Bon brgya Monastery - which
is the only Bonpo monastery in Reb gong- and the Reb gong bon mang, the
influence of the monastic system in the area is growing stronger.
(100) Bon brgya Monastery
1. Name
The formal name of the monastery is Bon brgya sMan ribshad sgrub smin grol
gling.
2. Location
It is located in the upper reaches of Bon brgya valley in Chu khog district
(xiang) of Reb gong, about 30 km southwest of Rong bo, the capital of rMa lho
Prefecture
3. History
There are no reliable written records concerning the origins of the Bon religion
in the Reb gong area, but according to oral tradition, one of the "six great universal
scholars" ("Dzam gling rgyan drug), Phrom gSer thog Ice 'byams, a Bonpo from
Phrom, spread Bon in his homeland, at a time corresponding to the earlier spread
of Bon. During Khri srong Ide btshan's time, Dran pa nam mkha' lived in Reb gong
and built a large monastery at A ba ngos bzang. During the time of King U dum
btsan, because of the persecution of Bon, the three grub thob, ("perfected beings")
-- all three brothers of the Khyung lineage - fled from Central Tibet to Reb gong.
They first stopped to rest at Chad lung thang, a short distance from the present site
of Bon brgya Monastery. Later the three brothers established their residences in
three villages in Reb gong-Khor lo bsgyur rgyal in sPyi sting village, Ye shes
mtsho rgyal in Ngo mo village, and Khyung dkar tshang ba in Khyung bo village -
and began to propagate Bon in the region. Their descendents and spiritual heirs are
still living in Reb gong (Bon brgya'i gsung, p.5). Around the same time, a Bonpo
called Byings klong rin chen from sTong che in Khri ka arrived in Reb gong and
married sTag ga'i Gyal mo byams. Their descendents became the Bon brgya village
284



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
that established itself in Bon brgya village in the valley of the same name. Several
members of the village founded a hermitage at the site of the present monastery
and formed the first religious community of Bon brgya Monastery. Other members
eventually became nomads. Originally Bon brgya village comprised only twenty
families but at present there are more than seven hundred families, including the
nomad families (Bon brgya'i gsung, p.6) which altogether constitute the local lay
community of the monastery. Although the monastery has a long history and is
renowned for its many remarkable tantric practitioners and monks, its development
as a monastic institution is fairly recent and probably does not go far back beyond
the time of Bon brgya g Yung drung phun tshogs who lived at the beginning of the
twentieth century and who built the Don gnyis lhun grub lha khang with statues of
the Three Buddhas of the Three Ages, rNam par rgyal ba, the Thousand Buddhas
and a stupa (mchod rten) dedicated to rNam par rgyal ba outside. Just as the statues
and the stupa were being completed, Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan sent a letter
to the monastery along with two hundred types of sacred objects (rten) with which
to fill the statues and then visited the monastery in person. This event created a
sensation among the local community and marked the history of the monastery.
Bon brgya g Yung drung phun tshogs not only became a student of Khri rgan 'Jam
dbyangs thub bstan rgya mtsho who was the teacher of the sixth Shang tshang (the
religious and political head of Reb gong at the time) but also became close to the
sixth Shang tshang himself. As a result, Bon brgya Monastery enjoyed a period of
prosperity and development. Later, however, the monastery was damaged twice by
the army of Ma Bufang, the warlord of Qinghai (Ma Bufang tongzhi Qinghai sishi
nian). In 1944, Kyang sprul Lung rtogs skal bzang rgya mtsho, a great master of
mDzod dge, remained at the monastery for a year during which he visited many
monasteries and gsas khang temples in the Kokonor area, giving teachings not
only to the monks at the monastery but to all the Bonpo communities throughout
the whole of Reb gong. Most monasteries and gsas khang in the Kokonor area
payed hommage to him. During his visit to Reb gong in 1980, the tenth Panchen
Lama proposed to rebuild Bon brgya Monastery and offered the monastery a
statue of Amitabha together with one thousand and eight hundred Chinese Yuan
for its reconstruction. Official permission was granted by the local government the
following year; the first buildings to be reconstructed were the Don gnyis Ibun grub
Iha khang and the residence of Bon brgya Trulku. In recent years, Bon brgya Trulku
established a philosophical school (bshad grwa) and a meditation school (sgrub
grwa) where the lo gsum (three-year retreat) is practised. The main assembly hall is
large and has twelve columns.
4. Hierarchical system
- The holder of the "gold throne" (gser khri) is Bon brgya de legs Ihun grub
285



rgya mtsho, often called Bon brgya Trulku, the reincarnation of Bon brgya
g Yung drung phun tshogs. He is also the chief teacher (slob dpon) of the
monastery,
- The abbot (mkhan po), selected for three years. The present mkhan po is Tshul
khrims nam mkhabstan 'dzin who is the reincarnation of Kyang sprul Lung
rtogs skal bzang rgya mtsho.
-khri pa, the "leader", also selected for three years. The present khri pa is Tshul
khrims blo gros.
- dge skos, the disciplinarian
- two dbu mdzad, the incantation masters
- two gnyer pa, the treasurers
- two dkor gnyer, the care takers, all of whom are also replaced every three
years.
5. Current number of monks
There are about eighty monks and novices in the monastery and an additional
thirty who come from other monasteries to receive teachings from Bon brgya
Trulku.
6. Current education
Monks attending the philosophical school study the following subjects:
metaphysics such as bsdus grwa, blo rtags, phar phyin, as well as grammar, poetry,
painting, astrology, medicine, and calligraphy. Those who have successfully
completed the programme may compete for the dge shes degree. Students at the
tantric school are required to complete the three year practice (lo gsum); several
among them have completed the practice twice or even three times.
8/9. Rituals
- 1st month, 3rd - Ilth day: the sMon lam chen mo, including a four-day rituals
of the Klong rgyas mandala, the dBal gsas cycle on the morning of the 7th
day, the chanting of the bka'skyong gdangs yig in the afternoon of the same
day, the cycle of the Rig 'dzin bon skor on the 10th day, debates are held in
between the rituals.
- 4th month, 20th - 23th day: the ritual of the rТsa gsum cho ga bzhi sbrags
- 5th month, 13th - 16th day: the ritual of the Yi dam kun 'dus kyi tshogs mchod
- 13th day of the 6th month to 1st day of the 8th month: the gbyar gnas
observation
- 9th month, 15th - 23th day: the cycle of dBal gsas sgrub chen with the 'cham
performance on the 22nd day, the monastery's officials are reelected at end of
the ritual if their terms came to an end.
286



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
- 12th month, 24th - 29th day: the performance of gTorbzlog chen mo based on
the bs Tan pa'i lcags ri yi dam stag la'i srung zlog tshad Idan gyi sgrub pa
Besides the major rituals performed collectively by the Reb gong bon mang,
there are various monthly rituals performed by the monastery separately: the Klong
rgyas mchod pa on the 8th day, the Tshe dbang bod yul ma on the 10th day, the mDo
chog cho ga bcu gnyis on the 15th day, the Kun rig gnas 'dren rgyas pa on the 25th
day, and 8-day for the offering of the tshogs to the goddess Srid pa rgyal mo during
the summer.
The daily practice: one hour is devoted to prayer (tshogs 'don), two hours to
lessons, one hour to debate, one hour to recitation of texts. The rest of the day the
monks study alone. Sunday is their day off.
10. Books held in the monastery
There are three copies of the Bonpo Kanjur, more than a thousand volumes of
various Bonpo works, one copy of the Buddhist Kanjur and Tenjur, one copy of Shar
tshang skal ldan rgya mtsho's complete works, one copy of 'Jam dbyangs bzhed
pa's works, one copy of Zhabs dkar pa's works, and one copy of the Rin chen gler
mdzod
In the assembly hall, there are statues of rNam par rgyal ba, sMra seng, Byams
ma, mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan, Bon brgya g Yung drung phun tshogs, and
thangka representing Byams ma, Kun rig, Kundbyings. Dus 'khor, Gyal ba rgya
mtsho, sMan bla, rNam 'joms, dGe spyod, Mon lam mtha' yas, gNas brtan, Kun
bzang zhi ba, dBal gsas, Grub chen brgyad cu, sTag la, Srid rgyal, and sTag gzig
zhing bkod. In the chapel (mchod khang) of the Bon brgya residence, there are more
than thirty finely executed thangkha representing mDzad pa bcu gnyis, gNas brtan,
Zhi thang, Yi dam kun 'dus, Je mNyam med yab sras gsum.
11. Income and expenses
In addition to general offerings made by the lay community, the monastery
posesses one hundred female yak ('bri), as shi med and a truck, and has a total
yearly income of around twenty thousand Yuan. The monastery also has a live-in
wood-block engravor and a sculptor.
12. Local community
Since all the Bonpo villages in Reb gong belong to their own village temple
and to Bon brgya Monastery at the same time, information concerning this question
is dealt with in the detailed descriptions of the gsas khang. According to my estimate
in 1996 during my fieldwork for the Japanese research project on Bon, there are
forty-six major villages divided into numerous branches comprising six hundred and
ninety-one families (about 4368 people) in Reb gong, in addition to seven hundred
287



nomad families (around 4000 people) in the Bon brgya pasturelands.
13/14.
These sections are dealt with when giving accounts of the individual temples.
Sources
(1) Interview in autumn of 1996 with: Bon brgya dGe legs lhun grub rgya mtsho
(b.1935), the head of Bon brgya Monastery and master of all the temples in Reb
gong area.
(2) Texts:
- BGLD
(101) Bon brgya Temple
1. Name of the temple
Bon brgya gSas khang gSang sngags dar rgyas gling or briefly Bon brgya gsas
khang.
2. Location
The temple is located in Bon brgya village in the middle of Bon brgya valley
about 3 km east of Bon brgya Monastery (No.100).
5. Current number of priests
There are twenty one Bonpo tantric practitioners in the temple.
8/9. Rituals
Kun bzang and Tshe dbang in alternation on the 10th of each month. Rituals
dedicated to Kun bzang and the sbyin sreg ritual known as the sNang srid zhi ba
chen po from the 15th to the 24th day of the 1st month. Kun bzang and sPyi 'dul
together from the 17th to the 22nd day of the 6th month, followed by the sbyin sreg
ritual. Kun bzang and dBal gsas from the 11th to the 22nd day of the 11th month.
12. Local community
Three villages: La kha with twenty families, Thang tshang with six families,
and Tshe dbang with ten families (one hundred and forty people altogether).
13. Local festivals
There are three la btsas connected to the temple: the la btsas of Bya khyung
in Bon brgya thang built by rTse zhig Gyal ba tshul khrims, located 1 km from
288



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
the temple the la btsas of g Yung drung dgra 'dul, who is regarded as the spiritual
son of rMa chen spom ra, is at the top of gSer khang thod hill, built by Bon brgya
gYung drung phun tshogs, also located 1 km from the temple the la btsas skyes ri
on Ridmar hill, 1 km from the temple; originally placed at the foot of the hill it was
moved to the top by a practitioner called dByings rig rnam grol or 'Bum pa rgyal.
All three local deities are propitiated on the 17th day of the 6th month.
At the top of Mount Gya rdung, 3 km from the village, there are two la btsas
dedicated to the local deities known as A myes Bon sgang and A myes So ye that
belonged to the no longer existing gDung nges Temple (see the introduction to this
section).
14. Occupation of the local people
Agriculture
(102) Mag gsar Temple
1. Name
gSas khang gYung drung bstan dar gling
2. Location
The temple is located in Mag gsar village of Chu khog Township of Reb gong
County, at the foot of Bon brgya Monastery, 100 m south of the monastery, (latitude:
35°25'58"N, longitude: 101°55'14"E).
3. History
The practitioners claim that they are the spiritual descendents of Khyung po
bsTan pa dar rgyas, a famous local Bonpo practitioner.
5. Number of practitioners
There are twenty-six tantric practitioners in the temple.
8/9. Rituals and ceremonies
The tshogs 'khor rituals of the deities: Kun bzang, Tshe dbang, dBas gsas, Zhi
khro and sPyi 'dul in alternation on the 10th of each month. Kun bzang and sPyi
'dul together from the 3rd to the 11th of the 11th month with 'cham. sPyi 'dul on the
25th to 30th of the 12th month.
12. Local community
The local community consists of four villages: Thang skor with twenty
289



families; dGa' skor also with twenty families, rTswa ring with five families, gNas
lung with seven families. Altogether forty families and two hundred and twenty-six
people.
deal
13. Local festivals
There are three la btsas, cairn around the temple. 1. the la btsas of Zho lung
built in the past by the village children for fun. It was later moved up to Mount Zho
lung 1.5 km from the temple, following a prophecy made by Khyung mo sGrub pa
mthar phyin. The local deity (yul lha) Zho lung is propitiated on the 9th day of the
5th month. 2. the la btsas of 'Dzoms lung is situated on Mount Rirgod, 4 km from
the temple, also propitiated on the 9th day of the 5th month. 3. the la btsas of rGya
'du is on Mount Nga skyes, 5 km from the temple, propitiated on the 17th day of
the 6th month.
14. Occupation of the local population
Agriculture
(103) rGya mtsho dpal Temple
1. Name
gSas khang Theg chen bon 'khor lhun grub gling
2. Location
Gya mtsho dpal Temple is located in Gya mtsho dpal village which is also
called A rga steng (latitude: 35°32' 16"N, longitude: 102°04'59" E).
5. Number of practitioners
There are twenty seven Bonpo tantric practitioners in the gsas khang.
8/9. Rituals
Kun bzang, 'Bum pa and Tshe dbang in turn on the 10th of each month. Kun
bzang and 'Bum pa from the 23rd to the 28th day of the 5th month. Kun bzang and
"Bum pa the 16th to the 21st day of the 11th month.
12. Local community
Five villages: mKhar gong ma with fourteen families, mKhar zhol with ten
families, Shar tshang with ten families, 'Khyer yag with twelve families and Kha
dbugs with eight families (fifty-four families and three hundred and twenty six
people altogether)
290



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
13. Local festivals
The la btsas dedicated to the local deity m Thar smug is located on top of
Mount m Thar-smug about 5 km from the temple and propitiated on the 11th day of
the 4th month. The la btsas of Tshe lung 3 km from the temple and propitiated on
the 9th day of the 5th month.
14. Occupation of the local people
Agriculture
(104) Gad pa skya bo Temple
1. Name
gSas khang gSang sngags rig 'dzin dar rgyas gling
2. Location
Gad pa skya bo village (latitude: 35°32'58"N, longitude: 102°04'64"E).
5. Number of practitioners
There are thirty-four Bonpo tantric practitioners in the temple.
8/9. Rituals
Kun bzang, 'Bum pa and Tshe dbang in turn on the 10th of each month. Kun
bzang and dBal gsas from the 14th to 18th day of the 5th month. 'Bum pa from the
16th to 21st day of the 11th month. sPyi 'dul and sTag la from the 25th to 28th day
of the 11th month.
12. Local community
Three villages: Gong ma with twelve families, gNya tshang with ten families
and Ser grong with nine families (thirty one families and two hundred and seventeen
people altogether).
13. Local festivals
The two la btsas of mThar smug and Tshe lung are propitiated on the same day
by both Gad pa skya bo and Gya mtsho dpal villages
14. Economic occupation of local people
Agriculture
291



(105) gDong mgo Temple
1. Name
gSas khang Theg chen smin grol rgya mtsho gling
2. Location
gDong mgo village of sPyi tshang (latitude: 35°32'17''N, longitude: 102°04'
00"E).
5. Number of practitioners
There are twenty two Bonpo tantric practitioners in the temple.
8/9. Rituals
Kun bzang and 'Bum pa from the 21st to the 26thday of the 1st month. Kun
bzang on the 10th day of each month. Kun bzang and 'Bum pa for five days at a
suitable time in the 5th month. Tag la from the 16th to the 21st day of the 11th
month.
12. Local community
gDong mgo village comprising forty-four families (three hundred and ten
people altogether) is considered as the lha sde of the temple.
13. Local festivals
The two la btsas of Thar smug and Tshe lung are propitiated on the same day
by the people of gDong mgo, Gyal mtsho dpal and Gad pa skya bo villages
14. Economic occupation of the local people
Agriculture
(106) Ngo mo Temple
1. Name
gSas khang Gyal bstan ye shes rgya mtsho gling
2. Location
Ngo mo village (latitude: 35°30'19"N, longitude: 102°03'77"E)
5. Number of practitioners
There are twenty six Bonpo tantric practitioners in the temple.
292



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
8/9. Rituals
Kun bzang, Tshe dbang, 'Bum pa, each alternately on the 10th day of each
month. Kun bzang and 'Bum pa from the 5th to the 10th of the 5th month. 'Bum pa,
Rams pa and Khro bo from the 25th to 30th day of the 11th month.
13. Local festivals
There is a la btsas of the gsas khang, on top of a hill in front of the village
temple, 3 km away and propitiated on the 9th day of the 5th month. The la btsas
of gYung drung Iha rtse is situated on top of the hill behind the gsas khang and
propitiated on the 17thday of the 6ht month. The la btsas of Ngo mo, also called
sMad kyi Ngo mo, 4 km from the gsas khang and propitiated on the 15th day of the
5th month.
14. Economic occupation of the local people
Agriculture
(107) Gyang ri Temple
1. Name
gSas khang Rig 'dzin thugs rje byang chub gling
2. Location
Gyang ri village (latitude: 35°28'95"N, longitude: 102°03'85"E)
5. Number of practitioners
There are sixty-seven Bonpo tantric practitioners in Gyang ri Temple.
8/9. Rituals and ceremonies
Kun bzang, Tshe dbang, dBal gsas and 'Bum pa, in turn, on the 10th of
each month. A seven to eight-day ritual for the village in the 1st month, on a date
determined beforehand by Bon brgya Trulku. dBal gsas and 'Bum pa, in alternation,
from the 1st to the 8th day of the 5th month. Kun bzang and the ritual based on the
Nang srid zhi ba chen mo for seven days starting on the 25th day of the 6th month
Kun bzang, dBal gsas and 'Bum pa from the 11th to the 7th day of the 11th month.
12. Local community
Two villages: Gyang ri gong ma with ten families and Gyang ri zhol ma with
twenty-four families (two hundred and forty people altogether). The former village's
tutelary deity is dBal gsas, and that of the latter 'Bum pa.
293



13. Local festivals
There are seven la btsas connected to the temple:
1. the la btsas of sTag lung constructed by A myes Thugs rje, about 20 km from
the temple; the local deity is propitiated by the Bonpo, rNying ma pa and
de lugs pa together on the 17th day of the 6th month, the main officiants
however must be Bonpo).
2. the la btsas of sTag lung chung ba, located about 150 metres from the one
just mentioned, and likewise propitiated on the 17th day of the 6th month.
3. the la btsas of A myes gNyan steng on A myes gNyan steng hill, 2 km behind
the temple, propitiated on 25 June.
4-7. the la btsas of the local deities Bon rgan, Bon chung, Nyag ga and dBu rtse
in Bon brgya khog 73 km from the temple; the last four are propitiated on the 6th
day of th 7th month.
14. Economic occupation of the local people
Agriculture
(108) Gling rgya Temple
1. Name
gSas khang mDo sngags phun tshogs dar rgyas gling
2. Location
Gling rgya village (latitude: 35°35'96''N, longitude: 102°08'03"E)
5. Number of practitioners
There are one hundred Bonpo tantric practitioners in the temple.
8/9. Rituals
Tshe dbang on the 10th of each month. Kun bzang, 'Bum pa and sPyi 'dul from
the 13th to the 16th day of the 1st month. The initiation of the Yi dam kun 'dus and
Zhi khro from the 14th to the 16th day of the 4th month. Tshe dbang and dBal gsas
for abundant crops from the 5th to the 8th day of the 5th month. Kun bzang, 'Bum
pa and sPyi 'dul from the 16th to the 18th day of the 11th month. The complete
cycle of 'Bum pa from the 23rd to the 30th day of the 11th month. Kun bzang, 'Bum
pa and sPyi 'dul from the 27th to the 30th day of the 12th month.
12. Local community
Three villages: dBang chen with twenty-four families, Tshe mkhar with
294



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
twenty-four families, and rTen rgyal with twenty-seven families (seventy-eight
families and three hundred and twenty-seven people altogether). There are one
hundred and forty families of the rTen rgyal village living as nomads on the shores
of the Kokonor, but they have been converted to Buddhism.
13. Local festivals
There is only one la btsas dedicated to the local deity Ngo tshang. According
to some it was built by Grub thob Tshang pa, to others by Dung dkar Tshang pa. It is
located 10 km from the temple and propitiated on the 9th day of the 4th month.
14. Economic occupation of local people
Agriculture
(109) Zho 'ong nyin tha Temple
1. Name
gSas khang Kun 'dus g-yung drung 'gyur med gling
2. Location
Zho 'ong nyin tha village (latitude: 35°36'34''N, longitude: 102°11'17"E)
5. Number of practitioners
There are twenty five Bonpo tantric practitioners in the temple.
8/9. Rituals
Kun bzang, Tshe dbang, Zhi khro and 'Bum pa alternately on the 10th of each
month, Kun bzang, 'Bum pa and Rams pa from the 11th to the 18th day of the 1st
month. The ritual of the Yi dam kun 'dus and Zhi khro from the 14th to the 16th day
of the 4th month. An important ritual dedicated to the Ma tricycle from the 25th to
the 30th day of the 10th day. Kun bzang, 'Bum pa and Rams pa from the 13th to the
20th day of the 12th month.
12. Local community
Two villages: sGang skor and dPon skor, comprising a total of twenty-three
families and one hundred and thirty people.
13. Local festivals
There are three la btsas:
1. a common la btsas for both Bonpo and Buddhists dedicated to the local
295



deity called Pa' bo hrirgan. The la btsas was rebuilt by a dGe lugs pa Lama
named mChu dmar Blo bzang rgya mtsho. It is located at the top of the hill
Tsha nyed la kha, 2km from the temple and propitiated on the 17th day of the
7th month.
2. the la btsas of Yar Kha located 2 km from the temple and propitiated on the
9th April.
3. the la btsas of Bon dkar 5km from the temple, propitiated on the 11th day of
the 6th month.
14. Economic occupation of the local people
Agriculture
(110) Dar grong Temple
1. Name
gSas khang sGrub pa'i rgyal mtshan mi 'gyur gling
2. Location
Dar grong village
5. Number of practitioners
There are twenty-seven Bonpo Tantric practitioners in the temple.
8/9. Rituals
Kun bzang and Tshe dbang alternately on the 10th of each month. Kun bzang,
"Bum pa and sPyi 'dul from the 16th to the 20th day of the 1st month. Kun bzang
and sPyi 'dul from the 16th to the 20th day of the 12th month.
12. Local community
The community comprises twenty families (one hundred and eighty people
altogether).
13. Local festivals
The la btsas of 'U gzur located 3 km from the temple, at the center of the
mountain facing the temple and propitited on the 17th day of the 6th month.
14. Economic occupation of the local people
Agriculture
296



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
(111) Khyung bo thang Temple
1. Name
gSas khang Khyung dkar smin grol rig 'dzin gling
2. Location
Khyung bo thang Mad pa village (latitude: 35°39'90"N, longitude: 102°04'
29"E)
5. Number of practitioners
There are one hundred and forty Bonpo tantric practitioners in the temple,
8/9. Rituals
Kun bzang and Tshe dbang alternately on the 10th day of each month. Kun
bzang and dBal gsas from the 21st to the 30th day of the 1st month. Kun bzang,
dBal gsas and Khro bo from the 21st to the 30th day of the 3rd month. mKha''gro
gsang bcod from the 15th to the 16th day of the 4th month. Kun bzang and 'Bum
pa from the 5th to the 10th day of the 5th month. Kun bzang and sTag la from the
16th to the 21st day of the 11th month. Kun bzang, Tshe dbang, "Bum pa and sTag la
from the 20th to the 30th day of the 12th month.
12. Local community
There are two main villages, Gong skor and Phyi skor. The former comprises
the following sub-villages: sTag a 'bum with seventeen families, Bonpo with twenty
families, and dPon skor with ten families, and the latter mKhar sgo gong ma with
twenty families, mKhar sgo zhol ma with ten families and ITag kha with fifteen
families. These villages are considered as the lha sde of the temple.
13. Local Festivals
The la btsas is dedicated to the local deity dMag dpon dra 'dulthogs med
rtsal. It is a common la btsas for both Bonpo and Buddhists. Built according to
instructions given by Bon brgya Trulku. It is located 1 km from the temple and
propitiated on the 9th day of the 4th month. The la brsas of the local deity sTag shar
on top of sTag shar sgang hill, which is the rgvab ri of the temple. It is 13 km from
the temple and propitiated exclusively by Phyi skor village on the 11th day of the
2nd month. The la btsas of the local deity Bya khyung is located at the top of one of
the three peaks known as 'Khyams tho spun gsum, the three 'Khyams tho brothers,
around 67 km from the temple and propitiated on the 4th day of the Sth month.
There is another type of la btsas made of stones (rdo 'bum), associated with
Phun tshogs bla ma. It is 3 km from the temple and is propitiated by Gong skor
297



village only on the 18th day of the 2nd month.
14. Economic occupation of the local people
Agriculture
(112) sDong skam Temple
1. Name
gSas khang gSang sngags bdud 'dul lhun grub gling
2. Location
sDong skam smad pa village
5. Number of practitioners
There are fifteen Bonpo tantric practitioners in the temple.
8/9. Rituals
The fasting ceremony (smyung gnas) from the 15th to the 16th day of the 4th
month. dBal gas from the 5th to the 10th day of the 5th month. dBal gas and Khro
bo from the 21st to the 30th day of the 11th month.
12. Local community
There are four villages with a total of ninety-nine families in sDong skam
village but most of them have been converted to the dGe lugs pa tradition and also
the rNying ma pa in the recent centuries. Only thirty Bonpo families comprising a
total of hundred and four people remain as the temple's former villages. As a result
the temple is used by all three religious groups but on different dates.
13. Local festivals
The la btsas dedicated to the local deity called dMag dpon is said to have been
built by Tshe dbang bkra shis, a chief of sDong skam village. It is located 200 m
from the temple and is propitiated by both Bonpo and Buddhists on the 15th day of
the 5th month.
298



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(113) Hor nag Temple
1. Name
gSas khang gSang chen smin grol dpal ldan gling
2. Location
The temple is located in Hor nag village about 15 km north of Rong bo, the
capital of the Reb gong region (latitude: 35°37'02Nlongitude: 102°00'46"E).
5. Number of practitioners
There are twenty-eight Bonpo tantric practitioners in the temple.
8/9. Rituals
Tshe dbang on the 10th of January, Khro bo and Pho nya gze ma from the
22nd to the 30th day of the 3rd month. On the Sth day of the 10th month, the ritual
dedicated to Kun bzang is performed for ITse zhig chos rje, a master from Tse zhiy
Monastery in Gan rgya pasture near Bla brang Monastery. The ritual dedicated to
Kun bzang is also performed by each of the Bonpo families in turn on the 29th of
each month.
12. Local community
Six villages: 'Khyams skor with twenty families, Na tsang ma with five
families, Tshe thar 'bum with six families, Sha rgya with thirteen families, dPon skor
with one family and Cha g-yog with five families (fifty families and three hundred
people altogether).
13. Local festivals
The la btsas of Gya ye at the top of Zu lung built by Gya ye gNam go byams
and propitiated on the 15th day of th 6th month. The la btsas of sKya ye at the top
of bra shis sgang, built by Hor nag Byams pa rgyal, often referred to as Hor nag A
myes Byams pa rgyal and propitiated at a suitable date in the 5th month.
14. Economic occupation of local people
Agriculture
299



(114) Tong che Temple
1. Name
gSas khang Rig 'dzin kun 'dus mam rgyal gling
2. Location
s Tong che village (latitude: 35°37'06"N, longitude: 102°00'74"E)
5. Number of practitioners
There are twenty three Bonpo tantric practitioners in the temple.
8/9. Rituals
Kun bzang and dBal gsas alternately on the 10th day of each month. Kun
bzang, Tshe dbang, dBal gsas and sTag la from the 22nd to the 30th day of the 3rd
month.
12. Local community
Three villages: Ke bcag with thirty families, Khyung mo with eighteen
families, and Ka ye with eighteen families (sixty-six families and four hundred and
twenty people altogether).
13. Local festivals
The la btsas of A myes rTen 'gyings, 2 km from the temple, propitiated on the
10th day of the 6th month. There is also a temple (tha khang) dedicated to A myes
Gya thang. It is apparently the common local deity of the whole sTong che valley
In sTong che village of the Khri ka district there is also a temple dedicated to A myes
Gya thang with the same appearence and origin.
14. Economic occupation of the local people
Agriculture
(115) Kyung bo la ga Temple
1. Name
gSas khang Khyung dkar bstan pa rgya mtsho gling
2. Location
Khyung bo la ga village (latitude: 35°37'68"N, longitude: 102°01'34"E)
300



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
5. Number of practitioners
There are thirty-two tantric practitioners in the temple.
8/9. Rituals
Kun bzang and Tshe dbang occur alternately on the 10th of each month and
dBal gas on the 29th of each month. Kung bzang, the sbyin sreg ritual of the Nang
srid zhi ba chen mo and sPyi 'dul from the 17th to the 24th day of the 1st month.
Khro bo and Pho nya gze ma from the 22nd to the 30th day of the 3rd month. A
five-day ritual dedicated to dBal gsas at a suitable time in the 5th month.
12. Local community
Four villages: mKhar nang with thirty-one families, dGarba with twenty-three
families, Nyin skor with eleven families and sDong skam with twenty-four families
(five hundred and sixty people altogether).
13. Local festivals
The la btsas, whose name is unknown, is located 1 km from the temple and
propitiated on the 11th day of the 4th month. The local people say that it was built
by unidentified Bonpo tantric practitioners in the remote past.
14. Economic occupation of the local people
Agriculture
301



County Seat
Township Seat
Administrative Village
N
Monastery
County Border
Township Border
River
Road
Footpath
gCan-tsha County
1/3,390,000
Khri-ka County
Dong skwyp-po-hang paskha
Xunhua(rDo-rbis) County
glen skam gas hang Mad-
T rung Hà
shyung-Jo la
p ia
song cheant 2
* Zba'dugayle-sya-khung
Herachlor-nag
l inis-khang
lege
Dar grond
Dar-grong Sas-klan Zho-ong
*****gNyan-thog; Cad-pasky-bopan-khang
par nobis-kanya-ba-dpal Su-khung
Rong-bo/ No-
Mua - khan
Gyal-bo
yang-pl
a grigas hang
Bon-brea monastery
Muggar lakhang p h ong
Reb
gong County
(Tong ren)
thu-khop
bSang-chu County
(Xiahe)
302



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(100) Bon brgya Monastery, Plate 1
303



(100) Bon brgya Monastery, Plate 2 Bon brgya de legs Ihun grub rgya
mtsho (b. 1935), a reincarnation of the monastery
304



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
LLLLLLL LEDERE
(101) Bon brgya Temple, Plate 1
305



306
(101) Bon brgya Temple, Plate 2 The Bonpo tantric practitioners (sngags pa) in Reb gong
(Photo S.G. Karmay 1996)



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(102) Mag gsar Temple
LENA
(103) Gya mtsho dpal Temple
307



(104) Gad pa skya bo Temple
(105) gDong mgo Temple
308



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
FOR
(106) Ngo mo Temple
(107) Gyang ri Temple
309



(108) Gling rgya Temple
(109) Zho ong nyin tha Temple
310



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(111) Khyung bo thang Temple
S
ee
(113) Hor nag Temple
311



SANX
TTTTTTT
(114) Tong che Temple
(115) Khyung bo la ga Temple
312



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
(116) Zhwa khra Temple
Zhwa khra Temple is located in the Zhwa khra village which is 18 km south
of the county town of gCan tsha. Bonpo community in this area is small. According
to oral tradition, a tribe called Zhwa khra, was banished during the persecution of
Bon religion by King Khri srong Ide btsan. They arrived in gCan tsha after having
settled in Gong dkam village of Reb gong for many generations. There was a series
of chiefs starting from gYung drung ram rgyal through Tshul khrims bstan'dzin,
gYung drung rgyal mtshan, Gya mtsho, Mar ris, g Yung drung rgyal, Tshe thar and
Khro rgyal. The latter became a monk and a nephew of his took his place to be the
chief of the tribe.
A monk of La mo bde chen, a large dGe lugs pa monastery located in the same
area, went to Lhasa for studying. He was kown as Zhwa khra IHa rams pa when he
obtained the degree of lha rams dge bshes in Lhasa. Nobody seems to remember his
real name today. He had a Ma ni khang built in Zhwa khra village when he came
back from Lhasa, and the Ma ni khang was shared by both Buddhist and Bonpo
people for centuries. The date of the foundation is not clear, but, according to dBang
grags, a retired leader of gCan tsha county and comes from Zhwa khra village, and
some old Bonpo such as Padma Tsering who were from the village as well, the Ma
ni khang was founded about eight generations ago.
A lay Bonpo tantric called Nam thar rgyal had a statue and thangka of the
divinity dBal gsas made in the Ma ni khang, and so tantrics of both Buddhists and
Bonpo practised together for many years.
Today, there are eighteen lay tantrics in the Ma ni khang. They practise
both Buddhism and Bon relgion. Ma ni khang has forty-two families as its local
community. And then, rNam thar rgyal finally founded a Bonpo temple in the
village called m Tsho kha near Zhwa khra village and this was how Bon religion
began to spread there. The temple was damaged in middle of the twentieth century
and has not been yet rebuilt.
Another Bonpo lay tantric called Do rje founded a new and small Bonpo
temple separately in Zhwa khra village in the second half of the twentieth century to
follow rNam thar rgyal's example. Do rje has his family and a few followers. In the
temple, the ritual cycle of dBal gsas is performed from to time to time. There are no
regular rituals either in the Ma ni khang or the gSas khang.
Source
(1) Interview in 1996 with : dBang grags and Padma Tsering, a lay tantric, both from
Zhwa khra village
313



@
Yellow
County Seat
314
River
e
Ba-yan County
Township Seat
Administrative Village
Monastery
-
Tsha'i-mgur
County Border
Township Border
River
Road
1/460,000
Kya-rengs
Tsho drugo
Mar-khu-thang
Sa-dkar-gong
TH1-31 0
ma Count
Zhya-kha
Nang kong
River
Khri-ka County
Yellow
Xunbau (rDo-sbis) County
gCan-tsha-thang
DOP
be
Rong
Reb-gong County



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(117) So nag Temple
So nag is a large community situated in the pasture of gCan tsha County. There
were only lay tantrics in the gSas khang, but recently there are also some monks
from the community, but since the monks do not have a monastery, both lay tantrics
and monks practise togather in the gSas khang. No records seem to exist about the
history of the gSas khang. I visited it in 1996, but unfortunately there was not any
old tantric from whom one could get some information on local history concerning
the gSas khang. I hope to be able to fill up this gap when this book appears in
Tibetan edition in the future.
315



316
rTse - khog County
So-nag saskhang
skyld-po-
Cha-skor
Bya-dar-thang
Due-dkar
County Seat
Na
in
Township Seat
han
hab
*
-
Monastery
Mountain
County Border
Township Border
River
Road
Pootpath
rMa-lho County
1/660,000



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu und Sichuan
(117) So nag Temple
317



(118) To shes Temple
1. Name
The formal name of the temple is gSas khang gSang sngags bdud 'dul gling,
2. Location
It is located in To shes village in gSer gzhung (Jin yuan) district (xiang), Ba yan
(Hua long) county, Qinghai province, 8 km north of gSer gzhung district (xiang) 45
km east of the Ba yan county town.
3. History
In rTse zhig Monastery at Gan rgya pasture, lived a renowned master called
dGar ba gYung drung rgyal mtshan who taught for many years and had many
disciples. Unfortunately, his trulku passed away in childhood. The following
reincarnation was discovered in sTong chung of Ba yan, northern Amdo (Hua long
county, Qinghai province). Apparently he did not return to rTse zhig but greatlly
contributed to the spread of the Bon religion throughout the Ba yan area, where he
became known as Tong chung zhabs drung (TZLD p.6b). The latter's reincarnation
was Zhabs drung bSod nams g-yung drung dbang rgyal (1894-1949), who was very
active at the beginning of the 20th century in both the religious and political fields
in Amdo. He was a disciple of sBra ser Pandita Kun bzang rgyal mtshan and Bon
brgya g Yung drung phun tshogs, and in turn became the master of monasteries of
rTse zhig, To shes, Shar steng, ska gsar, Khyung mo, Reb gong Bon mang and
the Bonpo community in Cone. He founded Dung dkar Monastery (No.132). He
was the family priest (gzhi dpon) of the tenth Panchen Lama's family in sBis mdo
(Xiong hua county in Qinghai). He also won the esteem of Ma Bufang, the famous
Chinese warlord of Qinghai in the early 20th century, who offered him a seal with
the following inscription: "the seal of Tse dbus who is the lama of all the tantric
Bonpo monasteries and lay communities in the East" (Shar phyogs sngags bondgon
grong spyi'i bla ma rtse dbus pa'i tham ga). He was also offered a Yig gshib (shubs)
lag the, which, as his son bs Tan 'dzin (see below) explains, was a substitute for the
postmark reserved for his personal use. His calling card states that he is the overall
master of all the Bonpo monasteries in Qinghai" (Guan li qing hai baijiao ge si
zong fo zhang) and he is referred to as Tse dbus tshang. He died on 22 September
1949. Following the instructions he left in his testament, Kyang ston Gyal ba'i
dbang bo lung rtogs skal bzang rgya mtsho remained in the area for three years, to
find his reincarnation whom he discovered in the person skal bzang bstan'dzin rgya
mtsho (also known as A mgon bla ma or A lags Pad ma), who was born in 1950 to
the mGon rgya family of A mgon village in Khyog chu (Chu ma xiang, Ba yan
county) is the present Tse dbus tshang (TZLD p.5a-b). According to bs Tan 'dzin
318



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
dbang rgyal, the son of the rTse dbus bla ma and a reincarnation from Kun bzang rin
chen of sNang zhig Monastery (No.180), rTse dbus bSod nams g-yung drung dbang
rgyal also founded To shes Temple at the age of twenty-five. Since the latter was
born in the Wood-Horse Year of the 15th Rab byung, which corresponds to 1894, the
monastery must have been founded in 1918. There are Chinese inscriptions inside
the gsas khang stating that the temple was painted eight years later, in 1926, and its
walls covered by decorated bricks, in 1941. More recently it was restored by bs Tan
'dzin dbang rgyal
4. Hierarchical organization
- head lama
- two dge skos
- two dbu mdzad
Since the temple belongs to two villages, To shes and sBra 'og, there is one dge
bskos for each village, and because To shes is larger than the other village, the dge
bskos for To shes is reappointed each year, while that for sBra 'og is reappointed
every two years. One of the two dbu mdzad is in fact the deputy dbu mdzad, he is
appointed for two years and then is appointed dbu mdzad for another two years, on
a rotating basis and according to seniority. The lama is the deputy of the temple's
principle master, and is responsible for disposing of the gtor ma during rituals.
5. Number of practitioners
There are eighty tantric practitioners in the gsas khang.
6 and 7. Current education and Educational exchange
The older practitioners teach the younger ones. Apart from Shar steng gsas
khang with whom it shares the same master, bs Tan 'dzin dbang rgyal, it has no ties
with any other gsas khang or monastery, since it is relatively isolated from the rest
of the Bonpo community in the Kokonor area.
8/9. Rituals
Since the members of the gsas khang are lay practitioners and work as farmers,
they practise individually on an irregular basis and gather only for the following
rituals:
Tshes bcu, on the 10th day of each month: on the 10th of the 1st, 4th, 9th and
10th month, the practitioners perform the ritual of the tshogs 'khor offering to bla
ma, yi dam and mkha''gro, commonly referred to as rТsa gsum tshogs 'khor based
on the text rТsa gsum kun 'dus mchog bsgrub zab mo yid bzhin nor bu by syang
sprul Nam mkha' rgyal mtshan. The tshes bcu ritual of the remaining months is
concerned with shogs 'khor offering to mKha''gro Kye ma 'od mtsho. The full title
319



of the ritual text is mKha''gro rtsa rgyud gsang chen rol ba zang thal mkha''gro
rgyud 'bum.
The gsas khang holds three major annual rituals: the tshogs 'khor ceremony
for mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan on the 5th day of the 1st month, for dBal
gsas from the 12th to the 19th day of the 6th month with 'cham on the 19th day; for
dBal gsas again from the 2nd to the 11th day of the 11th month, with 'cham on the
9th day. There are three less important annual rituals: the shogs 'khor ceremony
based on the Yi dam kun 'dus from the 13th to the 15th day of the 5th month,
commemorating the death of syang sprul Lung rtogs skal bzang rgya mtsho, who
was the main master of the Ba yan Bon mang; the tshogs mchod ritual based on
the Dug Inga rang grol from the Irst to the 6th of the 10th month, the full title of
the ritual text is: Theg pa chen po dmar khrid dug Inga rang grol gyi dgongs pa
don 'dus by bsTan 'dzin rin chen. In addition there are two annual rituals of the Yi
dam kun 'dus and Dug Inga rang grol held by To shes and Shar steng in turn and
a ritual of the stag la cycle from the 15th to the 20th day of the 11th month. Only
ten practitioners gather for the three minor rituals. For the first of the three major
rituals, two of the gnyer pa are responsable for collecting offerings and cooking for
the participants; for the other two rituals, participants must bring their own food (but
only rtsam pa, no meat or bread).
12. Local community
The lay community consists of two main villages: To shes with four branch
villages: Yar nas, Mar nas, Srib Ita and La ga, (forty families with a total population
of more than four hundred), and sBra 'og, with twenty families and a population
of one hundred eighty (altogether sixty families and a population of five hundred
eighty).
13. Local festivals
There are four la brsas, all constructed with help of bs Tan 'dzin dbang rgyal
Rinpoche: The renewal ceremony of the la btsas of Thang bzang rang skyes, takes
place on the 9th day of the 5th month, that of Brag dkar rtse 'dzin on the 4th day of
the 6th month, and that of dPal mkhar, also on the 9th day of the 5th month, that of
Yos mo nyal sa on the 11th day of the 7th month.
14. Occupation of the local people
Farmers
Source
(1) Interviews: bsTan 'dzin dbang rgyal, the master of To shes and Shar steng village
temples and one of the most learned Bonpo scholars in the Ba yan area. He was
320



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai. Gansu and Sichuan
born in 1932 and was recognized as the trulku of Kun bzang rin chen of sNang
zhig Monastery where he was enthroned at the age of fifteen.
(119) Shar steng Temple
1. Name
gSas khang gSang sngags bdud 'dul gling
2. Location
It is located in Shar steng village 45 km east of Ba yan (Hua long), the seat of
Ba yan county, near the gSer gzhung (Jin yuan) village.
3. History
The temple was founded by rTse dbus tshang bSod nams g-yung drung dbang
rgyal, the founder of To shes Temple (No.118); he founded Shar steng Temple a year
after To shes Temple in 1919.
4. Hierarchical system
There is one leader and two dge bskos and two dbu mdzad. One of the two
dbu mdzad is in fact deputy dbu mdzad, the deputy dbu mdzad is appointed for two
years and then is appointed dbu mdzad for another two years, on a rotating basis and
according to seniority. The lama is the deputy of the Temple's principle master, and
is responsible for disposing of the gtor ma during rituals.
5. Number of tantric practioners
There are seventy-three tantric practitioners in the gsas khang,
6/7. Current education and Educational exchange
The older practitioners teach the younger ones. Apart from To shes Temple with
whom it shares the same master, bsTan 'dzin dbang rgyal, the temple has no ties
with any other temple or monastery, since it is relatively isolated from the rest of the
Bonpo community in the Kokonor area.
8/9. Rituals
Since the members of the temple, like those of To shes are lay practitioners and
work as farmers, they practise individually on an irregular basis and gather only for
the rituals which are exactly identical with those of To shes Temple.
There are two annual rituals based on the Yi dam kun dus and Dug Inga rang
grol held by To shes and Shar steng in turn and a ritual of the gDugs dkar cycle from
321



the 15th to the 20th day of the 11th month. Only ten practitioners gather for the
minor rituals and these take place exactly the same way as those of To shes Temple.
12. Local community
The local community consists of fifty families (three hundred people in total) in
Shar steng village.
13. Local festivals
Same as those of To shes Temple
14. Occupation of the local people
Agriculture
Source
(1) Interviews in autumn of 1996 with: bsTan 'dzin dbang rgyal, on him, see To shes
Temple.
(120) sTong chung Monastery
1. Name
The site is locally known as Dung khyung. In certain written sources, such as
the biography of Khri ka Kun bzang rgyal mtshan, it is referred to as Tong chung
and is associated with sTong che in Khri ka. Not sure whether my interpretation
is correct: this association however seems to have been made by later scholars,
because for the local population in both areas the distance between sTong che in
Khri ka and sTong chung in Ba yan is considerable. The two monasteries probably
found out about each other after most of the Bonpo religious sites in Amdo were
converted to the dGe lugs pa tradition and Bonpo masters began travelling back
and forth between the few Bonpo sanctuaries that remained. With the exception of
the biography mentioned above, the site is not referred to as sTong chung, neither
locally, nor by the people of sTong che. According to another source, there were two
masters in sTong che known as sTon pa che ba and sTon pa chung ba, "elder master"
and "younger master" and the terms evolved into sTon che and sTon chung. Thus
sTon chung in Ba yan is supposed to have been named after the younger master who
went there. This version seems to be rather farfetched, and since Khri ka kun bzang
rgyal mtshan is renowned as a scholar, his version of the name's origin is widely
accepted, especially by the local Bonpo scholars.
322



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
2. Location
It is located in Dung khyung village in Tsa ba Township in Ba yan (Hua long)
County, Qinghai province, about 100 km west of the county town of Ba yan.
3. History
According to oral tradition, the monastery was originally built on the present
site of Bya khyung Monastery, one of the largest and most important de lugs
pa monasteries in Amdo, where Tsong kha pa was ordained. Indeed, before Bya
khyung Monastery was built, there was a Bonpo monastery surrounded by several
villages whose the inhabitants were fervent Bonpo. When Bya khyung Monastery
was built the Bonpo were expelled from the surrounding villages. They resettled at
sTong chung village where they or their descendents built a large Bonpo monastery
which was later destroyed by Hui Muslims. In the mid-20th century, the lama bDod
nams gYung drung dbang rgyal of rTse zhig began to rebuild the monastery; twelve
monks' cells and the residence of the head lama were completed, but then, owing
to the Chinese invasion, the main hall was never finished. The monastery was
eventually rebuilt in 1998 through the efforts of bZod pa bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan.
5. Current number of monks
There were six monks in the monastery in 1996.
7. Educational exchange
Since the monks were very busy for rebuilding the monastery under
the leadership of bZod pa bstan pa'i rgyal tshan. The latter is considered as
reincarnation, but was not yet formally recognised. There was not any kind of
monastic education when I visited the monastery, but, for historical reasons, the
monastery has close ties with bsTan 'dzin dbang rgyal of To shes Temple (No. 118).
Source
(1) Interview: bs Tan 'dzin dbang rgyal, the master of To shes Temple and Shar steng
villages, is one of the most learned Bonpo scholars in the Ba yan area. He was
born in 1932 and was recognized as the incarnation of Kun bzang rin chen of
sNang zhig Monastery (No.180).
323



(121) Tong chung Temple
1. Name
sTong chung gSan khang
2. Location
The temple is located in Tong chung village, 100 km west of Ba yan (Hua
long), the seat of Ba yan county.
3. History
According to an old text concerning the lineage of gZungs 'bum, a local Bonpo
family, religious gatherings of the village began eighteen generations ago. The
original site of these gatherings is not specified in the text. Later rTse dbus bSod
nams g-yung dung dbang rgyal, the founder of To shes Temple (No.118) and Shar
steng Temple (No.119), built a temple there. According to bsTan 'dzin dbang rgyal,
the son of the builder, the temple was built in the early nineteen-forties.
4. Hierarchical system
- principal master
- bla ma, deputy principal master
- two dge bskos
- one dbu mdzad
-one deputy dbu mdzad
Each member of the temple occupies the position of deputy dbu mdzad for two
years and then that of dbu mdzad for another two years on a rotational basis and in
order of seniority. The bla ma is responsible for preparing the gtor ma and disposing
it during rituals.
8/9. Rituals
The dBal gsas cycle from the 15th to the 20th day in the 5th month and a 'cham
performance on the 20th day of the same month.
Source
(1) Interviews in autumn of 1996 with: bsTan 'dzin dbang rgyal, on him, see To shes
Temple.
324



Pingan County
Gro-tshang County
Tsha-phug risa-ba
sTong-chung doon par
stong-chung Sasking...,
Minhe County
ofya-hor
Tag-tshang
Chu-dmar
Ba-yan-mkhar
To-shes gas-klying
Shurstengas dan
ser-hong
©
County Seat
Township Seat
Administrative Village
Monastery
County Border
Township Border
River
•
Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
uBa - Yan County
9 (Hua Long)
mTha'-rgya
-
gCan-tsha County
Road
Footpath
1/470,000
325
Xunhua (rDo-sbis) County



(118) To shes Temple
(119) Shar steng Temple
326



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(122) Ser kywa Temple
1. Name
Locally, Ser kywa Temple is referred to as a spyi khang, "Common House"
and not as a gas khang. Its full name is Ser kywa (also written as Se ky'a (73GLNy,
p.96) and Ser ky'a (KKRL, p.128) Bon sngags bdud 'dul me ri 'khyil gling.
2. Location
The temple is located in Ser kywa village in Shar lung district (xiang), Khri ka
county, 15km southeast of the county town (latitude: 35°57'01"N, longitude: 101°
31'06"E).
3. History
As with the other gsas khang in the Kononor region, there are no reliable
historical accounts of the monastery, whether oral or written.
5. Number of tantric practitioners
The gsas khang has one hundred and thirty-six tantric practitioners.
6. Education
According to some of the older members of the gsas khang, such as Kun bzang,
the gsas khang was under the guidance of mhar nag Tulku and sBra ser Tulku of
sTong che (in Khri ka) until the nineteen-fifties. The present master is Bon brgya
dGe legs lhun grub rgya mtsho. Young practitioners study ritual with their own
private tutors, and also go to Bon brgya Monastery or other places where Bon brgya
Rinpoche helps them receive further training. Bon brgya Rinpoche also occasionally
visits the gsas khang to give teachings.
7. Exchanges with other gsas khang establishments
With the of exception of the above-mentioned relations with Bon brgya
Rinpoche and his monastery, the gsas khang has no traditional ties with any other
monastery or gsas khang.
8. Monthly Rituals
Kun bzang, sPyi 'dul and sTag la rituals are performed on the 19th day of each
month. known as zla cho.
9. Annual Rituals
- 1st month: 10th-15th: Gya lo'i smon lam. The rituals performed during this
period are prescribed by Bon brgya Rinpoche on the 1st day of the 1st month
327



when representatives of the gsas khang go to Bon brgya Monastery to pay
their respects on New Year's day. Generally the smon lam rituals include the
propitiation of Khro bo gtso mchog and Abse.
- 3rd month: 25th-30th, the rite of Abse and performance of the Nang srid zhi
chen ritual
- 4th month: 4th-5th, the offering of 1000 times according to the skye sgo
gcod pa; 8th-13th, the ritual of fasting (smyung gnas) and of Kun bzang rgyal
ba rgya mtsho; 20th - 24th, the Zhi khro. ritual
- 5th month:1st -8th, Kun bzang. Since 28 families of Ser kywa village live
as nomades in the Srin po mountain area, quite far from the village, the Kun
bzang ritual is held only once a year.
- 9th month: 25th-30th, the propitiation of Drag btsan.
- 10th month: 8th-15th, the liturgy of Khro bo with the 'cham dance on the
14th.
In addition to the above rituals, there is a custom known as tsho mthun,
"agreement between villages", according to which certain rituals are held
collectively by two villages.
These rituals include:
(1) Khro bo from the 25th to the 30th day of the 4th month, and the stong gsum
'khrugs pa'i yo bcos, dGra bla'i dpung stod, Drug cu'igdon sel and Rlung
rta'i gar 'dzugs from the 1st to the 4th day of the 5th month held jointly by
the Bon dkar and Yag nyes villages.
(2) sPyi 'dul, together with the stong gsum 'khrugs pa'l yo bcos, Drug cu't
gdon sel, dGra bla'i dpung stod and Rlung rta'i gar 'dzugs, from the 5th to
the 13th day of the 5th month.
12. The local community
The lay community consists of four main villages which may be subdivided
into fifteen branch villages:
1. Bon dkar comprising five branch villages: Srog tsha with ten families, Phar
rka with eight families, Mar rka with eight families, La kha with eleven
families, and So tshang with fifteen families.
2. Slog brgya comprising three branch villages: Slog brgya with sixteen
families, Shi glo'u tshang with six families and A yag tshang with five
families.
3. Se skong tshang comprising five branch villages: Hor tshang with 4 families,
gDung tshang with six families, Bya brgya tshang with nine families, sNgo
rgya tshang with three families and Nag rgya tshang with 2 families.
4. Yag nyes tshang comprising two branch villages: Yag nyes tshang with
eighteen families and Bon nag tshang with sixteen families.
328



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
There are altogether one hundred and thirty-seven families and eight hundred
and thirty people. Ser kywa village is mainly a Bon po village with the exception of
nine families which are rNying ma pa. There is also a dGe lugs pa monastery named
Ser kywa nearby although there are no dGe lugs pa families living in the village.
13. Local festivals
The la btsas of the local deity Blari btsan gyi phye ma mnga rdung was built
with the instructions given by Bon brgya Trulku, 2 km from the gsas khang, and
propitiated on the day 9th day of the 5th month by the Bonpo, rNying ma pa and
dGe lugs pa communities together. The la btsas of Bondkar is located 15 km from
the gsas khang, on top of Mount Srin po'i pad ma dbang rgyal. It was built by Rig
'dzin So lha khyab ril, and is propitiated on 15th day of the 6th month by the Bon
dkar village.
14. Occupation of the local people
Farmers
Sources
(1) Interview in autumn of 1996 with: Kun bzang and other practitioners.
(2) Texts:
-- ISGLNy
- KhKRL
(123) Khyung mo Monastery
1. Name
The monastery was named after Khyung mo Trulku, the main reincarnate lama
of the monastery. It is also known as gYung drung phun tshogs gling.
2. Location
The monstery is located in Ba rgya village in sTong che valley of Chu nub
(Hexi) district (xiang) in Khri ka county, 18 km south of the county seat of Khri ka
county.
3. History
Literary sources: in addition to sBra ser Pandita Kun bzang rgyal mtshan's
unfinished autobiograghy, there are two more recent texts by sNying sangs rgyal
and sBra ser Tshangs dbyangs. Bra ser Pandita, also known as Khri ka Kun bzang
rgyal mtshan (or by his secret name Nam mkha' dbang phyug) was a learned monk
329



from sBra ser Monastery overlooking the village of the same name. There are no
written sources concerning the origin of Bon in sTong che. However, according to
oral tradition, in the 14th century Ye shes rgyal mtshan, a Bonpo monk from gYas
ru dben sa kha Monastery and originally from Sog sde in Nag chu kha, asked his
main master, mTha' bral bSod nams rgyal mtshan, about his future. His master
told him that he was to spread the doctrine in a land called g Yang lung ra gsum in
northern Amdo. Following his master's instructions, he left for Amdo in search
of the place. The master gave Ye shes rgyal mtshan a reliquary for keeping sacred
items exhorting him repeatedly not to open it before reaching his destination, but
Ye shes rgyal mtshan's treasurer, overcome by curiosity, opened the reliquary on
the way and a pigeon escaped from it. The bird was in fact dMag dpon, a guardian
of the Bon religion, which is why, it is believed, dMag dpon is propitiated by the
Bonpos living in Kokonor to this day. When they reached the shores of Kokonor
lake they learnt that gYang lung ra gsum corresponded to the three valleys of Khri
ka, and thus proceeded in that direction. When they reached sTong che valley, the
mule carrying their belongings dropped to the ground. Ye shes rgyal mtshan took
this as an auspicious sign. He decided that they would settle there and drove his
phur pa dagger into the ground. The gsas khang he built on the spot became Khyung
mo lha khang which survived until the middle of the 20th century. (The temple was
built in the old architectural style with the three Buddhas of the Three Ages at the
entrance flanked by eight sems dpa' on either side). The temple is the earliest of its
kind in Amdo; indeed, since Ye shes rgyal mtshan arrived there from central Tibet,
the temple was built in the original, central Tibetan style. Ye shes rgyal mtshan
became renowned as sTong che ston pa, also called Sog btsun ston pa, the "monk
from Sog sde" (in Amdo). He also built a monastery at the site of the present dPon
tshang Iha khang, but since its location in the center of the village was inconvenient,
it was moved to the present site of Khyung mo Monastery a few generations after its
foundation. It was during this period that the first temples in sTong che valley were
founded: sBra ser lha khang, dPon tshang lha khang and ska rgya stong skor spyi
khang.
A lags Khyung mo is the most important reincarnation of the monastery.
According to legend, Alags Khyung mo was a lama who practised the 'pho ba
grong 'jug, "tranferring the soul from one body to another". There are two lineages
of the practice of pho ba grong jug, one from India and the other from China. The
Indian lineage was discontinued when skar ma mdo sde, the son of Mar pa lo tsa
ba, was killed by Rwa lo tsa ba. A lags Khyung-mo is said to belong to the Chinese
lineage. The third A lags Khyung mo Kun dga' rgyal mtshan received the teaching
of pho ba grong 'jug from Rong sgom rTog med zhig po, a master of the Ho yang
ston lineage and initiated the practice of 'pho ba grong 'jug within the Khyung mo
lineage. Kun bzang rgyal mtshan was born to the Khyung po village in Nag chu kha
330



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
and was the son of the King of Hor (Hor spyi khyab rgyal po).
The elder people in the village remember that the eighteenth A lags Khyung mo
was a Chinese man from Ziling (Xining), who came to Khyung mo Monastery and
claimed to be the embodiment of the previous A lags Khyung mo who practised the
'pho ba grong 'jug. The monastery, after having investigated the matter, confirmed
his claim and he was enthroned at the monastery. This took place sometime in the
early 20th century. The present A lags Khyung mo, sTobs Idan dbang phyug, was
recognized by Gyal 'obs Rinpoche of sNang zhig Monastery of Nga khog. There
are no biographies of the A lags Khyung mo incarnations, only a list of their names:
1. Sog btsun sTon pa Ye shes rgyal mtshan
2. Sog btsun Grags pa rgyal mtsan
3. Kun bzang rgyal mtshan
4. Yon tan rgyal mtshan
5. unknown
6. Tshul khrims ye shes
7. Kun bzang ye shes
8. Nyi ma rgyal mtshan
9. Grub dbang Nyi ma
10. bsTan pa blo gros
11. Tshul khrims ye shes
12. bsTan 'dzin dbang rgyal
13. m Tshan Idan rgyal mtshan
14. bs Tan 'dzin ye shes
15. Phun tshogs dbang rgyal
16. gYung drung mam rgyal
17. bs Tan pa blo gros
18. sGrub pa mthar phyin
19. Gyal 'obs bs Tan 'dzin dbang rgyal
20. sTobs Idan dBang phyug, the present A lags Khyung mo
There was a mhar nag Trulku popularly known as mKhar nag grub chen, who
belonged to one of the three lineages of Khyung mo Monastery.
The monastery's most remarkable scholar was sBra ser Pandita Kun bzang
rgyal mtshan. He travelled throughout both Amdo and Khams. He finally arrived
in gYing drung gling where he studied under the famous mkhan po Nyi ma bstan
'dzin. He is the author of a great number of works. Following is a list of those
known to us: Nub phyogs stag gzig bde ba can gyi zhing smon; Sang rgyas sman
Tha'i cho ga 'bring po; Shes rab byams ma'i bstod pa: mKhar nag btsan gzhung
gi phyag bzhes, gDugs dkar bzlog bsgyur; Legs bshad rin chen gter khyim and
brDa sprod nyi shu bdun pa'i 'grel bshad. He was also a painter. A large zhing bkod
type of thangka depicting 'Ol mo lung ring, the Bonpo sacred land in sTag gzig, is
331



attributed to him. The image is regarded as the emblem of the Bonpo community
throughout Amdo. As a result, it has been copied in many temples and monasteries
in Amdo.
In the lineage of rTse zhig Lama of rTse zhig Monastery, there was a master
called Shes rab, more commonly known as A lags Shes rab, who became the
master of many temples and monasteries in Amdo including those in s Tong
che. He had several temples and a residence built in s Tong che Monastery. He
named the monastery gYung drung phun tshogs gling. Shes rab ram rgyal, his
nephew, travelled to Central Tibet where he lived and studied as a monk at Man
ri Monastery in gTsang. His aging uncle grew very sad for he was afraid he might
never see his nephew again, so Gyal ba, a monk at Khyung mo Monastery, went
to sMan ri to ask Shes rab rnam rgyal to return. The latter accepted and thus uncle
and nephew were reunited. Shes rab rnam rgyal also developed close ties with the
sixth Panchen Lama, dal ldan ye shes (1738-1780), who offered him a title and
seal investing him with authority over all the Bonpo communities throughout Amdo
(KTGN fol.9), and he became known as Tse zhig Drung rams pa.
He frequently returned to Khyung mo Monastery. From that time onwards, the
masters of the rTse zhig lineage have been in charge of Khyung mo Monastery, and
some among them as khri ba of the monastery even had a permanent residence there,
Later, g Yung drung bstan rgyas and rTse dbus rGyal ba tshul khrims from rTse zhig
Monastery also put a lot of effort into the monastery
Until the mid-20th century, monastery had three temples, one known as the
dPon tshang gsas khang was built by dBang rgyal, a chief of sTong che valley,
as an act of repentence for the killing of the seven brothers of Sha kya village by
the Tsha kho army. According to legend, when gYung drung Iha steng Monastery
was destroyed by Chinese forces during the Manchu dynasty an orphan child from
rGyal rong was adopted by a Chinese officer. When the boy grew up and became
an officer like his adopted father, he asked permission to destroy one hundred and
eight dGe lugs pa monasteries to take revenge on the dGe lugs pa for destroying
gYung drung Iha steng Monastery. Permission was granted and he was given the
troops stationed at Gyal rong-known by the people of Khri ka as the Tsha kho
army to assist him in his task. When the troops finally arrived in sTong che valley
to destroy Ba rgya Monastery, the last of the one hundred and eight dGe lugs pa
monasteries located near Khyung mo Monastery, they met stiff resistence from the
Sha kya village, the patron family of Ba rgya Monastery and their people. In the end
only the Sha kya's stag bdun (seven tigers of Sha kya village"), in other words, the
seven brothers of the village, were left to defend the monastery. The brothers took
refuge in a castle to make their last defense. At this juncture the chief of sTong che
proposed to act as mediator between the seven brothers and the Tsha kho troops and
obtained from the latter the promise that the brothers would not be killed if they
332



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
surrendered to the army. No sooner had the brothers surrendered than they were
killed. Since the chief had urged the brothers to surrender he felt responsible for
their deaths and built the temple as an act of repentence. We do not know the exact
dates of these events, but the story is still well-known today.
In the eighteen-nineties permission was granted for the monastery's re-
construction.
4. Hierarchical system
The head of the monastery is a sprul sku.
- one dge skos
- one dbu mdzad
6/7. Education and Exchanges with other monasteries
The elder men of this monastery have not taken vows of celibacy and have
families in the village. However, since the monastery's reconstruction in the early
nineteen-eighties, Khyung mo Trulku is trying to impose religious vows on the
younger monks. As a result both young monks who have taken the vows and elder
men who have not coexist inside the monastery. Generally the elder men only go to
the monastery for rituals and other religious activities and then return to their homes
in the village, while the young monks live inside the monastery on a permanent
basis. In the past, the establishment had close ties with Tse zhig Monastery of Gan
rgya pasture, but is now closer to Bon brgya Monastery, especially with A lags Bon
brgya, also called Bon brgya Trulku. Tse zhig Monastery was formerly the most
important Bonpo monastery in the Kokonor area but now, even though their master,
Trulku Zla ba, is a disciple of Alags Bon brgya, its influence has diminished. Thus
the monks of Khyung mo go to Bon brgya Monastery to receive teachings from A
lags Bon brgya.
12. Local community
There are seventeen large local lay communities around Khyung mo Monastery
in sTong che, both farmers and nomads:
1. Khyung mo lha sde with fifty families
2. sBra ser with twenty families
3. 'Bum kho with fifteen families
4. sNying nge Iha sde with sixty families
5. Sha rgya with ten families
6. mKhar nag with twenty families
7. sKa rgya with twenty families
8. sTong skor with twenty families
9. Lhasa with ten families
333



10. Nog wer sgang with five familes
11. Zhwa dmar with six familes. All the above mentioned communities are
farmers.
12. 'Brog ru'i dpon tshang with sixty families
S
13. 'Brog ru'i stong skor with fifty families
14. Kro'u tshang with ten families
15. Mar nang with twenty families
16. Shargya bon tshang ma with fifteen families
17. Bya mdo bon po tshang with about five hundred families, but most families
converted to Buddhism, leaving only thirty Bonpo families.
All the above-mentioned communities are nomads. Altogether There are four
hundred and twenty-one families around two thousand five hundred people). All
these families also support the four gsas khang of sTong che valley, as well as the
gsas khang of 'Brog ru'i stong skor and the tent gsas khang (tshogs ras) of 'Brog
ru'i dpon tshang.
13. (mentioned at the beginning of the document)
14. Occupation of the local people
Farmers
Sources
(1) Interview in autumn of 1996 with: Khyung mo s Tobs Idan dbang phyung, the
present Khyung mo bla ma of the monastery; Tshangs dbyangs, a monk and the
teacher of the present Khyung mo bla ma at the monastery.
(2) Texts:
- KTGN
- KHKRL
- TSGLNY
Bonpo temples in sTong che
(124) Gar ba Temple
(125) Bra ser Temple
(126) gZe ma Temple
(127) ska rgya Temple
1. Name
Among the four temples (Nos. 124-127), the local people call the first three as
334



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
Iha khang (temple) and the No. 127 as spyi khang. 'commune house'. While only
the tantrics and monks in sTong che use the term gsas khang, 'temple' since it is the
Bonpo's own term for a temple, the common people use the word lha khang, e.g.
sGar ba lha khang.
2. Location
The four temples are located in s Tong che valley which is under the
administration of Chu nub (Hexi) Township of Khri ka county, Tsolho (Hainan)
Prefecture in Qinghai Province. Gar ba and sBra ser are located in Ba rgya village
16 km from the county town and gZe ma and ska rgya are located in 'Bum kho
village south of Khri ka mkhar, the county town of Khri ka.
3. History
About history of Bon religion in Khri ka, specifically in sTong che, the only
text that briefly mentions about it, is the gShen gyi dge sbyong khri ka ba kun bzang
hstan pa'i rgyal mtshan gyi rnam thar, the autobiography of Khri ka Kun bzang
bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan who was born in Tong che valley, but unfortunately it has
only eighteen leafs and is incomplete. So there is very little information regarding
the history of Bon religion and its monasteries and temples in the area. According to
oral tradition, the four temples were founded by Sog btsun Ye shes rgyal mtshan who
also founded Khyung mo Monastery (No.123) located in the same area. It is said
that Sog btsun Ye shes rgyal mtshan came from Sog sde of the Nag chu kha region?
and according to gYung drung Ihun grub, the master came from Tsan tan Monastery
situated in that region.
The four temples were damaged at the end of the 1950s and were rebuilt in the
1980s.
4. Hierarchical system
The four temples have no special headship system. Masters from the three
lineages of Khyung mo Monastery, i.e. Khyung mo, mkhar nag and sBra ser, had
looked after the temples until the middle of the twentieth century. Presently it is
Khyung mo sTobs Idan dbang phyug who takes care of the four temples. Since all
of tantrics of the four temples practise their rituals together either in one temple
or another, they are called sTong che Bon mang as a collective name, and also for
this reason, they have only one suit of administrative system. However, among the
tantrics of the present day, dBang ba is regarded as the leader of all tantrics. When
they gather together in the temples for the rituals there are positions as follows:
- none dbu mdzad appointed from one to four years, depending on his ability
- one dge skos appointed for one year
- one gnyer pa for one year
335



- one mchod g-yog for one year
The positions must reelected by lay tantrics during the ritual of Khro brgya and
replaced on the 13th of the 1st month each year before the ritual finishing.
5. Current number of tantrics
There are about seventy-five tantrics in the four temples together in s Tong che
valley and an additional thirty-five who come from the nomadic part of sTong che
region.
7. Educational exchange
The tantrics of the four temples have a close relationship with Bon brgya de
legs lhun grub rgya mtsho, the head of Bon brgya Monastery (No. 100) in Reb gong.
Either they invite him to give them teachings or they often go to Bon brgya
Monastery in Reb gong to receive teachings from him.
8/9. Rituals
- Ist month: the ritual of Khro brgya from the 11th to 17th, the temples take
turn to hold the ritual every year.
- 4th month: ritual of g Ter sgrub for a few days, dates are not fixed.
- 8th month: ritual of Dam can rgya mtsho'i tshogs 'khor from the 14th to 16th;
this ritual must be performed in ska rgya Temple.
- 10th month: rituals of gZe ma, Kun bzang, and Khro bo are performed from
the 22nd to 29th in the gZe ma Temple.
10. Books held in the temples
A copy of Bonpo Kanjur and Katen of the bsTan pa'i nyi ma edition. In
addition to these there are many ritual texts which are kept in the gZe ma Temple.
12. Local community
The devotees of the four temples are those who follow Khyung mo Monastery
in sTong che
14. Occupation of the local people
Agriculture
Sources
(1) Interview in autumn of 1996 with: Tshangs dbyangs, the teacher of Khyung mo
sTobs Idan dbang phyug and Khyung mo sTobs Idan dbang phyug himself who is
the head of Khyung mo Monastery
(2) Texts:
336



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
- KTGN
- KhKRL
- TSGLNY
• Teng chen dgon grong gi lo rgyus tha mi dgves pa'l 'bel gtam by g Yung
drung Ihun grub, MS.
Notes
1 At the beginning, this temple was known as dPon tshang lha khang since it was built by
the chieftain of sTong che people. Later, the ritual of gZe ma, which is a chapter of the
Khro bo text, is performed in the temple, it became known as gZe magsas khang.
2
Sog Tsan tan Monastery was originally a Bonpo monastery in Sog sde of Nag chu kha.
The fifth Dalai Lama had it converted with other six Bonpo monasteries and bka' brgyud
pa together into de lugs pa and renamed it as Sog shod dGa' ldan 'phel rgyas gling. See
Bod ljong nag chu khul gyi lo rgyus rig gnas, Seventh volume, pp.350-358 (published by
Nag chu sa gnas srid gros lo rgyus rig gnas dpyad gzhi'i rgyu chartsom sgrig khang).
3
Teng chen dgon grong zung gi lo rgyus tha mi dgyes pa 'l 'bel gtam by g Yung drung Ihun
'grub, pp.5-8. MS.
337



Yellow River
Yellow River
Khpa-mkhar
glsang-shar (Hedong)
1.1
.
Teang-bar Heyfa)
Tsang nub(He
Khri - ka County
Ser-kywa Sas-khang
Che-khol
rGyu-ro
Sog-po
Co No-wel
Mer-gan
skapa Tong-skor gSas-khang
skyrgya sTong-skor
“Burn-kho : 1
s na gSas-khang
sBra ser gSas-khang g ar bagas-khang
Khyung-mo** Balita
Shar.lu ug Dongzou)
County Seat
District Seat
Township Seat
County Border
Township Border
River
Road
Footpath
Administrative Village
Monastery
1/240,000
338



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(122) Ser kywa Temple
339



BORIS
INI
(123) Khyung mo Monastery
(124) Garba Temple
340



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(125)
Bra ser Temple
(126) gZe ma Temple
341



(127) ska rgya stong skor Temple
342



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(128) 'Brog ru stong skor Temple
A rig stong skor gsas khang is located in 118 km northewest of Chabcha, the
county town of Gonghe. The local people call it simply Ma ni khang.
It is said that sTong skor, which was a large tribe, spread from the stong skor
tribe of Tong che valley to Khri ka. In the past, these people were adherents of Bon.
Almost all of them were converted to Buddhism. Only seven families remained
Bonpo to this day.
In 1989 for the first time a temple was founded for the people. There are five
lay tantrics in the temple where two annual rituals are performed: Nam rgyal stong
mchod and sPyi 'dul. The performance of the first takes place from the 1st to 5th
of the 5th month. This is performed by some monks from Dung dkar Monastery
(No.132) which is situated in the same county, and the second is performed for a few
days in the 10th month.
The people in sTong skor practise both agriculture and pastoralism.
Source
(1) Interview in autumn of 1996: sTag thar rgyal, a Bonpo lay trantric in the tribe
(129) 'Brog ru'i dPon tshang Tent Temple
sTong che is a long valley of Khri ka County. There are a lot of tribes in the
valley and they were originally nomads. In the past, these tribes were grouped into
two parts. Some of them who remain in the valley became farmers, other who still
have kept animals are of course nomads. The latter moved to Mugethang pasture,
about two hundred km west of sTong che valley, and it is administratively belongs
to Guinan County instead of Khri ka today. In local dialect, the two communities are
referred to as ru yul 'brog, 'nomads and farmers'.
dPon tshang is the family of the chieftain of the community in the valley. The
family also has a nomadic part with the same name on Mugethang pasture. Its Tent
Temple, called 'Brog ru'i dPon tshang Tshogs ras, is usually kept in Mugethang.
The Tent Temple of 'Brog ru'i dpon tshang and that of Bon brgya are the
two largest ones in Amdo. Unfortunately I have not been able get any information
regarding the history of the Tent Temple of Brog ru'i dPon tshang and the dates of
its annual rituals, because the people were scattered all over the place in their pasture
land when I undertook fieldwork and celebration of their rituals did not coincide
with my visit to this place.
343



(130) Bon brgya Tshogs ras (Tent Temple)
Tshogs ras signifies 'cloth tent for gathering
In Amdo dialect, the sbra, "tent' is pronounced as 'ra', so that tshogs sbra has
become tshogs ras since the tent is now made of cotton.
Bon brgya Tshogs ras is one of the very few tent temples that is still used in
Amdo. The Tent Temple has no fixed location. It is moved from one place to another
just as the nomadic tents. Every year a new location for the tent is chosen to perform
the annual rituals. These rituals are usually performed only in autumn on pasture so
that the weather is still warm and convenient for the people to attend the ceremony.
(131) Bon brgya Khyung smon Monastery
1. Name
The full name of the monastery is Bon brgya Khyung smon dgon smin grol
mdo sngags bshad sgrub bdud las ram rgyal don gnyis hun grub gling.
2. Location
It is located on Bon brgya pasture which is about 45 km east of Mang stod, the
county seat of Guinan.
3. History
According to Bon brgya gyung drung thun grub, the origin of the monastery
was a small temple called Bon brgya gsang sngags bdud 'dul gling founded in 1409
by Sha rgya g Yung drung rin chen at 'Batshe chu kha in Reb gong (for reference
see his work given below), but this consideration needs to be proved. The present
Bon brgya Khyung smon Monastery was founded by him during 1983 to 1990. He is
the head of the monastery.
4. Hierarchical system
- one dgon bdag bla ma
- one khri ba bla ma (for one year)
- one byang 'dren or dbu mdzad (for one to three years)
- one dge skos (for one to three years)
- one gzhung gnyer chen mo (for one to three years)
- one mchod gnyer for each temple (for one to three years)
- one dung 'bud for each temple (for one to three years)
- one rtsi 'bud for each temple (for one to three years)
- one dbu g-yog for each temple (for one to three years)
344



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
-one ja gnyer for each temple (for one to three years)
All the incumbents are appointed every year by Bon brgya g Yung drung Ihun
grub based on reelection of monks except the mchod gnyer, rtsi 'bud, dung 'bud, dbu
g-yog and ja gnyer which are appointed by the dge bskos, mchod gnyer, risi 'bud,
dung 'bud, dbu g-yog and ja gnyer could be punished to carry out the services for a
longer period in case they did not do them well.
5. Current number of monks
There are eighty-eight monks in the monastery.
6. Current education
The monk students receive a traditional education, both through private tutoring
and collective lessons organized by the monastery.
7. Educational exchange
The monastery has a close relationship with rTogs Idan Monastery (No.178)
in Nga khog. They send monks to rTogs ldan for some further studies and receive
monastic vows.
8/9. Rituals
- 1st month: ritual of Mon lam chen mo from the 1st to 13th of the first month;
in conjuction with this ritual, the following rituals are also performed based
on the texts such as the rMa gnyan yul tha'i bsang khrus, sTong rgyung
brngan chen mo, sDe brgyad brngan bsang and rMa rgyal spom ra'i g-yang
'bod.
- 2nd month: ritual of Kun bzang rgyal ba'dus pa from 8th to 15th
- 3th month: ritual of bsKang chen from 25th to 29th
- 4th month: ritual of commemoration of Byang ston Rinpoche
- 5th month: ritual of sTag la'i sgrub chen from 8th to 16th
- 8th month: ritual of gSang bdag mkhar rtse from 20th to 23rd
- 12th month: ritual of dBal gsas sgrub chen from 13th to 21st
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has nine printed copies of Bonpo Kanjur and one printed copy
of Bonpo Katen. Two printed copies of the Collected Works (twenty-five volumes)
of Kun grol grags pa. Five printed copies of the Collected Works (thirteen volumes)
of Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan. Four printed copies of the W (sixteen volumes)
of g Ter chen Tshe dbang 'gyur med. Five printed copies of gter ma collection
(twenty volumes) of gSang sngags gling pa. Four printed copies of the Collected
Works of Tshul chen bs Tan pa'i rgyal mtshan. Four printed copies of the Collected
345



Works (two volumes) of dBra ston bskal bzang bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan. Three
printed copies of the biography of Bon brgya Rang shar rig grol, Bon brgya gYung
drung phun tshogs and Byang ston Nam mkha'rgyal mtshan. More than two
hundred other Bonpo texts. In addition to these, there also several Buddhist texts.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery has neither land nor animals. The monks are provided for by
their families and the monastery depends financially on donations from the faithful.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists eight villages in Bon brgya shog kha
(communal division) in Bon brgya pasture and Reb gong, because almost every
village of Bon brgya shog kha has both agricultural and nomadic parts, the former
is in Chu khog Township of Reb gong County, the latter is divided into two parts
administratively which are Sumdo Township of Guinan County in m Tsho lho
Prefecture and Bon brgya Township of rise khog County in rMa lho Prefecture.
13. Local festivals
There is a sacred mountain called A myes Ba yan located west of the
monastery. The date of its veneration is 4th of the 6th month every year. It is
circumambulated by both Bonpo and Buddhists until today.
14. Occupation of the local people
Agriculture and pastorilism
Just now, when I have finished writting about Bon brgya Khyung smon
Monastery, sad news has reached me to say that Bon brgya g Yung drung Ihun grub
has passed away in his monastery. I hope that his reincarnation will come soon and
his plan to build a Tibetan medicine hospital in Bon brgya pasture for the people will
be materialized accordingt to his wishes.
Sources
(1) Interviews in autumn of 1996: gYung drung Ihun grub, the head of Bon brgya
khyung smon Monastery; sByin pa, monk of the monastery.
(2) Texts:
- Bon brgya yab myes kyi sgrub sde rjes skyong ba khyung sman dgon gyi bon
*byung lo rgyus grub pa'i gdung rabs dang mkhas pa'i gdan rabs rnams brjod
pa sdong rnying me tog gsar bzhad dpvid kyi dpal yon by Bon brgya g Yung
drung Ihun grub. MS.
346



County Seat
District Seat
®
Township Seat
Administrative Village
Monastery
Mountain
County Border
Township Border
River
Road
Footpath
4 iG-mang
Kos-nan phyug-ra drug-pa
Tong-skor gsas-khang
Kos-nan phyug-ra bzhi-ba
dPon-tshang tshogs-ras
1/680,000
Khri-ka County
- Mang ra (Gui nan) County
Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
Mang-stod
Bon-brạya
Bon-Brgya tshogs-rasf
Sum-mdo
..
rTse-khog County



(128) 'Brog ru stong skor Temple
(129) "Brog rul dPon Ishang Tent Temple
348



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(131) Bon brgyakhyung smon Monastery, Plate 1
(131) Bon brgya khyung smon Monastery. Plate 2 gYung drung ihun grub,
head of the monastery
349



(132) Dung dkar Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is Dung dkar smin grol gling and derives from its
location at the foot of Mount Dung dkar lha gnyan dkar po which is believed to be
the abode of the deity A myes Dung dkar.
2. Location
The monastery is located 20 km north of Chab cha town in Ur rti Township in
Gong he county, mTsho lho prefecture in Qinghai province.
3. History
In the early 20th century there were two Bonpo hermits of unknown origin,
living in two caves on Mount Dung dkar lha gnyan dkar po. There were also four
monks from Tsha kho, rGyal rong living in the same place as those of the hermits.
g Yung drung rgyal mtshan and g Yung drung, two of the four monks were known as
the dGe slong rnam gnyis. These monks from Tsha kho and and another two monks
Tshul khrims bstan'dzin (from Che rje sTong skor) and dPal mchog from Khyung
mo Monastery (No.123) decided to set up a monastery together. Tshul khrims bstan
"dzin, who had stayed at sTeng chen Monastery (No.139) asked his master bZod pa
rgya mtsho which of the three following sites: Hi la wor in sTong che (in Khri ka),
Mo we (in Che rje) or Dung dkar (in Chab cha), would be the best location for a new
monastery. The master immediately and without hesitating selected Dung dkar. The
monks then requested bSod nams g-yung drung dbang rgyal, a famous Bonpo master
from Ba yan to assist and guide them in their task. As a result, bSod nams g-yung
drung dbang rgyal and the four monks are regarded as the founders of Dung dkar
Monastery. I had the opportunity to visit dPal mchog, one of the four monks, in the
late nineteen-seventies shortly before his death. According to bsTan 'dzin (b.1930),
the head of the monastery whom I interviewed, the monastery was founded around
1940. A new small assembly hall was rebuilt in 1982. The present hall was built in
1992 by Tulku Tshul khrims of Ba yan.
4. Hierarchical system
- one sprul sku
- one dbu mdzad
- one dge skos
- one spyi gnyer
- one mchod dpon
Their terms of office are not fixed. The present head of the monastery is Tulku
bsTan 'dzin dbang rgyal.
350



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
5. Current number of monks
At present there are twenty-eight monks living in the monstery.
6. Current eduction
The younger monks are taught by the elder monks and also go to Bon brgya
Monastery in Reb gong to receive further teachings from Bon brgya Tulku.
7. Educational exchange
Since several of the founders came from Khyung mo Monastery (No. 123),
many of the monastery's practices were borrowed from Khyung mo Monastery's
tradition. At present, however, the monastery has closer ties with Bon brgya
Monastery (No.180) in Reb gong.
8/9. Rituals
- Ist month: the Klong rgyas ritual from the 4th to the 6th days
- 3rd month: performance of the ritual based on the Yi dam kun 'dus from the
13th to 17th days
- 4th month: performance of the rNam rgyal stong mchod ritual from the 3rd to
8th days
- Sth month: performance of the ritual base on the rТsa gsum from the 13th to
the 15th days
- 6th month: the dbyar gnas retreat from the 13th to the 19th days
- 9th month: performance of the gNas brtan stong mchod ritual from the 22nd
to the 27th days
- 10th month: performance of the Nyag bla ritual from the 13th to the 17th days
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has one copy of the Bon po bka' 'gyur; the complete works
of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan and Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan, and
various tantric texts.
12. Local community
As the lha sde of the monastery, there are three villages: Ur rti with 30 families
which belong to Ur rti Township in Gong he County, Ka gsar with 50 families
which belong to Chab cha Township of Gong he County, and thirteen families of the
Khu sgyu'u tribe in The ge Township in Gong he county
13. Local festivals
The Dung dkar la btsas, situated on top of Mount Dung dkar, behind the
monastery, is renewed on the 1st day of the 6th month.
351



Source
(1) Interview in autumn of 1996 with: bsTan dzin was about 65 years old, a monk
of the monastery
(133) rka gsar Temple
1. Name
rKa gsar gSas khang gSang sngags bdud 'dul gling, but it is a type of spyi
khang,"common house".
2. Location
The temple is located in Ka gsar village of Chab cha Township, Gong he
county, Tsho lho Prefecture.
3. History
According to oral tradition, a group of people from sPyi tshang village in
Reb gong moved to Ka mdo in Ba yan and the new settlement came to be known
as Ka mdo sPyi tshang. Their descendents split into three tribes: sPyi tshang, Kha
yangs gdong and Ba yan in Ba yan. After some time, three men from these three
tribes, together with their families arrived in Chab cha and settled at what is now
known as rka gsar village. The man from sPyi tshang tribe was 'Phrin rgya, his
direct descendents are mKhar rtse, Khro rgyal, Tshe ring mkhar (who passed away
in 1996), dpal bzang (b.1949), g Yung dung dar rgyas (b.1996); the man from Kha
yangs gdong tribe was dBang rgyal, his direct descendents are bSod nams, Shes rab,
g Yung drung rgyal, Kun bzang, bsTan 'dzin (b.1976); the man from Ba yang tribe
was 'Bum pa, his direct descendents are Byams pa, Do rje, sTag la, Sangs rgyas
rgya mtsho (b.1965). "Phrin rgya of sPyi tshang tribe, was the leader of the three
families and built the first three assembly halls of the temple, which was to become
rKa gsar Temple. For this reason "Phrin rgya is considered to be the founder of Ka
gsar Temple.
In the first half of the 20th century, rTse zhig Sod nams g-yung drung
dbang rgyal, the founder of Dung dkar (No.132), visited rKa gsar, and the Bonpo
community of ra gsar village offered him some pieces of temple's land. As a result
he moved the three assembly halls to the foot of Mount Dung dkar lha gnyan dkar
po to be Dung dkar Monastery, a few kilometres from the temple as well as the
present assembly hall of rka gsar gSas khang.
5. Current number of practitioners
There are forty tantrics in the gSas khang.
352



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
6. Current education
The young practitioners are taught by two teachers belonging to the gSas
khang, who mainly follow the teachings of Bon brgya Rinpoche.
12. Local community
There are seven villages: rKa gsar village with thirty families, Kha sgang
zhol ma village of Sa gru bzhi Township of Gong he County with four families, Ra
rgan village of The ge Township of Gong he County with twelve families, Zhang
bu ras village of the ge Township with eight families, rGya ra village of Chab cha
Township of Gong he County with two families, skyi gdong village of Chab cha
Township with six families, Ur rti village of Ur rti Township of Gong he County
with forty families.
Souree
(1) Interview in autumn of 1996 with: 1Cags thar rgyal (b.1942), a practitioner in the
temple
(134) A rig stong skor Temple
1. Name
Arig stong skor gsas khang, but local people refer to it as Ma ni khang.
2. Location
The temple is located in a place 118 km northwest of Chab cha, the county
town of Gonghe.
3. History
sTong skor is known, according to oral tradition, as a large tribe which was
originally came from the stong skor tribe of sTong che valley in Khri ka. They
were formerly followers of the Bon religion. However, later almost all of them were
converted to Buddhism except seven families who still continue to practise the Bon
religion to this day. The temple was founded in 1989 and it was the first one.
5. Current number of practitioners
There are five lay tantrics in the temple.
8/9. Rituals
From the 1st to 5th of the 5th month, the ritual of rNam rgyal stong mchod is
performed. In the 10th month the ritual cycle of sPyi 'dul is performed. It has no
353



fixed dates.
13. Local festivals
The mountain behind the temple is called gCas bcu and is believed to be a
dwelling of the sixteen gNas brtan.
14. Occupation of the local people
Agriculture
Source
(1) Interview in autumn of 1996 with stag thar rgyal, a Bonpo lay trantric who lives
in the village
354



@
County Seat
Township Seat
Administrative Village
Monastery
County Border
Township Border
River
Road
Kokonor
1/1,200,000
sGo - me
Gong he County
Yin-'dur
B...
słong ako sa kanang provedbeno
Glam saying
sTong-dkor
sTong-skor gSas-khang
Che-rji
m
13
U-rti Daop die
Tasar Sorry
ka puas bang orgy-
Nub-zhing-kha ..
Sa-gru-bzhi ----
....
Chab-cha
Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
355



(132) Dung dkar Monastery
(133) ska gsar Temple
356



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(134) Arig stong skor Temple
357



Derge County
Derge (sDe dge) is a county of Kardze (Tibetan dKar mdzes, Chinese Gan zi)
Tibetan Autonous Prefecture in Sichuan Province. It is located on the east bank of
the 'Bri chu river (the Yangtze, Chinese Jing sha jiang) in the northwestern part of
the prefecture. The county is divided into seven Qu comprising twenty-six Xiang,
and one hundred and seventeen administrative villages. Gonchen (dGon chen), the
capital of the county is located at latitude 31°48'N, and longitude 98°34'E, at an
altitude of 3,240m. The county is particularly famous for its printing house known
as Par khang chos mdzod chen mo bkra shis sgo mang. It is the largest traditional
printing place in the Tibetan cultural area in Sichuan. The Par khang is renowned for
its editions of the Buddhist 'Ka''gyur and bs Tan 'gyur and certain texts of the Sa
skya, dGe lugs, bka' brgyud, Nying ma and Bon traditions, as well as its printing
blocks of images for reproducing thangkas. The printing house was founded by
bsTan pa tshe ring, the fortieth King of Derge, in 1729 within the complex of Derge
Gonchen Monastery, located in the county town. Another famous site in the county
is the temple Ge sar lha khang. Tibetans believe that Ge sar was born to the Gling
tshang family in Derge, and most of the epic's episodes take place in the Derge
region. Thus a temple dedicated to King Ge sar was built in the county in A phyug
pasture which is believed to be the hero's birth place. The temple contains statues
of Ge sar and the Thirty Generals. Many of the place names in the epic correspond
to existing places in the area. The temple is located 208 km northeast of the county
town. There are ten Bonpo, fourteen rNying ma pa, nine bKa'brgyud pa, one
mixed Nying ma pa and bka' brgyud pa, nineteen Sa skya pa, and five dGe lugs pa
monasteries in Derge county at present.
(135) Khro tshang Monastery
1. Name
The full name of the monastery is Khro tshang Dar rgyas dgon.
2. Location
It is located 206 kilometers northeast of Derge, the county seat, in Dung mda'
village, Lam mdo Township, dBon thog (Wointog in the local Tibetan dialect)
District in Derge county.
3. History
According to oral tradition, during the persecution of Bon by King Khrisrong
Ide btsan in the 8th century, two Bonpo masters, 'Bang riba Nam mkha' thog rdugs
and Grub chen bra shis rgyal mtshan, took refuge on the mountain Dza stod Rin
358



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
chen spungs pa in Derge. They attracted a number of disciples, including the Nine
Saints of Khrom rdzong (Khrom rdzong rtogs dgu), the most famous of whom was
Shes rab phun tshogs; their monastic establishment thus became known by the name
of Khrom rdzong Phun tshogs gling.
In the middle of the 1st Rab byung (1027-1097), rMe'u ston bSod nams came
to the monastery and began to teach Bonpo tantric practice and the monastery's
name was changed to bkra shis phun tshogs gling. Thereafter, the Khro tshang
lineage became the principal lineage of the monastery and the monastery was
renamed Khro tshang Dar rgyas gling. It is not clear who the first master was and
when precisely the lineage originated, but according to one account, the first master
was Khro tshang Mar legs. According to the same account, there were three brothers
in the Khro tshang lineage, Mar legs, Byang pa Nyi ma rgyal mtshan and Mula
snying po. Khro tshang Mar legs went to Zal mo syang and became the master of
the monasteries situated in Shar rdza'i Iding khrom. They are: Khro tshang, Mon
rgyal, 'Bum rmad, Shar rdza Ri khrod, sTeng chen, Zer 'phro and 'Phen zhol. His
two brothers went to The bong and Rong khams. Togs Idan Ye shes bstan 'dzin
(1772-?) of Khro tshang Monastery became the monastery's first abbot (mkhan po)
and established the observance of the summer fast (dbyar gnas). His successors were
mChog sprul Khro bo rgyal mtshan, mKhan chen IHun grub ye shes, r Togs Idan
bSam gtan ye shes, Dam Idan Shes rab seng ge (rTogs ldan chung ba, the "Younger
Saint"), Nyams rtogs Tshad 'phel dga' bde, Grub brnyes Tshe dbang 'od zer, 'Gro
'dren A dkar, rGyud 'dzin rNam mkhyen rang grol, Yongs 'dzin 'Brug gsas chems
pa (?-1991).
All the Kun grol Trulku from Kun grol 'Ja'tshon snying po (b.1700) to Kun
grol Hum chen were in charge of the monastery. gSang sngags gling pa from
Nyag rong and Shar rdza bra shis rgyal mtshan also taught and practised at the
monastery for a number of years.
4. Hierarchical system
A son from every generation in the patrilineal descent of the Khro tshang
family was chosen as the "throne-holder" of the monastery. The head of the
monastery is therefore hereditary.
- one sgrub bla
- two dbu mdzad
- two dge skos
- two mchod dpon
- two 'cham dpon
- six gnyer pa (divided into three groups of two)
All the incumbents are reappointed every five years with the exception of the
abbot.
359



5. Current number of monks
There are hundred and twenty monks and novices in the monastery.
6. Current education
Each year the monastery's administration appoints a teacher to teach Tibetan
literature and Bon practice and theory to the young monks for five months, from
January to the end of May. Every year, a group of monks perform a ritual called
zhag brgya, "one hundred nights", which includes the practices of sngon 'gro, rtsa
rlung, ritual cycles of dBal gsas, Phur pa, gSang ba drag chen, Khro bo, Byams ma,
gDugs dkar, Margyud, IHa rgod, Khyung dmar, sTag la and formerly Meri.
7. Educational exchanges
Khro tshang is a branch of sMon rgyal Monastery which is located in the same
area. This connection seems to have originated with Kun grol Hum chen, but at
present Khro tshang is closer to Shar rdza Ri khrod (which even has a number of
cells reserved for the monks of Khro tshang) and sends around two to fifteen of its
monks to Shar rdza Ri khrod for tantric practice and further training.
8. Daily rituals
They usually consist of the following practices.
Early morning
- A li ka li
- rtsa lung
- sdus phyag
- mchod pa
- bsang 'don
- chab gtor
During the day
- yi dam bsnyen sgrub
In the evening
- gsol kha
- bsur
- lus sbyin
-rtsa lung
9. Annual rituals
- 1st month, Rituals based on the followng texts: the 'Dzam gling spyi bsang,
Rig 'dus tshogs 'khor and Yi dam phyi nang gsang gsum gyi skang ba on the
1st day, the Kun rig sgrol ma for four days, mDo gYung drung klong rgyas for
two days, Zhi khro sgrub chen for ten days, Ma rgyud thugs rje nyi ma and
360



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
Kun gsal byams ma'i sngags sgrub for four days, starting on the 8th day
4th month, Rituals based on the sNang srid zhi chen gvi sbyin sreg and mChod
gtor bdud rtsi chu rgyun on the 10th day
- 5th month, Rituals based on the Bla ma rig 'dzin 'dus pa'i sgrub chen with
"cham for ten days, sPyi bsang yid bzhin nor bu and mChod gtor for two days,
the dbyar gnas summer-fasting (the number of participants for this ritual is
limited to twenty-five monks) for fifty days starting on the 3rd day
- 6th month, Rituals of the Byams ma'i mdo chog, Srid rgyal drel dmar gyi
tshogs 'khor, and the smyung gnas fasting practice from the 17th to the 22nd
day
- 10th month, Rituals based on the gYung drung yongs rdzogs and Khro bo
ngo mtshar rgyas pa'i sgrub chen, mKha'klong gsang ba'i mdos chen, Zhi
khro rtsa gsum rgya mtsho'i gar "cham with cham dance, for fifteen days,
beginning on the 17th. These rituals lead to the performace of the dgu gtor
rite.
- 11th month, Rituals based on the Bum sgrub chen mo sgrib sbyong dril
sgrub for eight days, 'Od dpag med and Zhi khro rigs brgya for seven days,
beginning on the 8th day, and the ritual cycle of sTag la performed by the
seven officials of the monastery for five days starting on the 25th.
- 12th month, the practice of the rab gnas consecration starting on the 10th day
for five days
Rituals of g-yang sgrub and the ritual cycle of gDugs dkar, Ge khod, and Phur
pa performed by seven monks for seven days at an auspicious time in the year.
Chanting of the bsang ceremony and the chanting of the main ritual text of the
dBal gsas cycle, and the atonement of Srid rgyal by one monk in the sgrub khang
every day.
10. Books held in the monastery
The assembly hall is the only surviving building of the original monastery
which was destroyed during the Cultural Revolution. It contains an entire wall
covered by paintings depicting the life of gShen rab Mi bo. The monastery once
possessed a complete set of the Bonpo Kanjur collected by Khro tshang Yid bzhin
dbang rgyal. When sPen pa dbang rgyal (b.1926), one of the present monks of the
monastery, was seven or eight years old, Yid bzhin dbang rgyal was already eighty
years old, which means that the latter was active in late 19th-early 20th century.
Since the monastery already possessed several sections of the Kanjur, Yid bzhin
dbang rgyal had the monks copy the missing texts, and copied a number of the texts
himself, following the order in the catalogue of the Bonpo Kanjur by Nyi ma bstan
'dzin. These Bonpo canonical texts with Yid bzhin dbang rgyal's own annotations
was still in the monastery's possession in 1997.
361



11. Income and expenses
In the early nineteen-eighties, the monastery received ninteen thousand Chinese
Yuan from the tenth Panchen Lama for its restoration. The monastery owns 12 mu
(a Chinese measuring unit -0.0667 hectares) of farmland, fifty female yaks looked
after by several local families who in exchange give the monastery 5 kg of butter
per yak per year (in 1997, 1 kg of butter sold for 28 Yuan). The harvest of each mu
yields 250 kg of barley (in 1997, 1 kg of barley sold for 2.60 Yuan).
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of three yul pa (communal division): Yar
thang with twenty-five families, Dung mda' with fifty families, and mKha're with
thirteen families, (a total of ninety-three families and a population of about five
hundred).
13. Local festivals
The three mountain peaks of rDza stod rin chen spungs pa are called Dung
rgyal, Seng chen and Drag sngon. Since the three peaks are the abode of lha btsan,
klu btsan and gnyan btsan they are also collectively known as bТsan rgod rnam
gsum, "the Three btsan rgod". The mountain was "opened" (gnas sgo phyed pa) as a
holy site (gnas ri) by gSang sngags gling pa.
The mountain is venerated by the local community on two different dates and
in two different ways: 1. the gnas skor circumambulation on the 15th day of the 4th
month, during which both the local lay community and the monks circumambulate
and perform the bsang ceremony at the mountain's three la btsas (la btsas bstod
pa). 2. Since Brag sngon, the summit immediately behind the monastery constitutes
the lowest foremost peak of the mountain, it is the monks alone who propitiate it
on the 21st day of the 7th month. This ceremony is called rlung rta bstod pa, the
scattering of the wind horse. The former ritual involving both lay men and monks)
is quite simple, but for the latter, the monks perform a complete ritual of bsang,
accompanied by the dar Icog flags and the wind horse.
14. Occupation of the local people
Mostly nomads and some farmers
Sources
(1) Interviews (August, 1997): sPen pa dbang rgyal, a former monk at the monastery
(b.1926) and g Yung drung dar rgyas, the dge bkos of the monastery
(2) Texts:
- KGLG, Vol.1, pp. 616-620



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(136) sMon rgyal Monastery
1. Name
The monstery's full name is Mon rgyal dga'Idan dar rgyas gling,
2. Location
The monastery is located on the north bank of the rDza chu river in A khod
valley, rDza khog in Derge, 233 km north east of Gonchen Township, the county
seat of Derge.
There is a hermitage called mThong chen Hermitage or sMon rgyal Hermitage
on the mountain behind the monastery,
3. History
There was a couple called 'Brog Bla ma 1Ha yi dbang po and dBra za mGon
skyid ma whose son was born near the sacred mountain rMa rgyal spom ra. The son,
named Ma rgyal Bla ma, established a hermitage at a site called sMon mKhan bu
gdong. He had two sons, Dam pa rang grol and IHa yi blo gros. The former, Dam
pa rang grol, became an accomplished master, specialized in the meditation system
according to the Zhang zhung snyan brgyud, the oral transmission from Zhang
zhung. He travelled extensively throughout Amdo and Khams to spread the teaching,
and became renowned in these regions as sMon rgyal Bla ma. His brother, IHa yi blo
gros, was a lay master, and his descendants include a great number of famous and
important masters (sMon rgyal dgon pa'i lo rgvus by Tshe brtan rdo rje, MS).
Dam pa rang grol took up residence in the hermitage on the site of the
monastery, but the period after his death until the time of Kun grol grags pa 'ja'
tshon snying po (b.1700) remains obscure. Kun grol grags pa, born in Khyung
po rGyas reg khog, undertook the monastery's construction. He was therefore
considered as the dgon bdag, the master of the monastery.
Here is a list of the Kun grol reincarnations:
1. Kun grol grags pa 'ja' tshon snying po, born Khyung po Gyas reg khog
2. Klu dbang rgyal po, born in mDo khams lha mo brag dkar
3. bsTan 'dzin rin chen gtsug phud, born in Central Tibet
4. bsTan 'dzin tshul khrims grags pa, born in 'Dan sgrol ma lha khang
5. 'Chi med bdud 'dul gling ba, born in Chos rgyal sde dge'i mdun skor
6. Hum chen 'gro 'dul gling pa, born in Gyal rong
The abbots of the monastery are known only from the time of 'Chi med bdud 'dul
gling pa, the fifth Kun grol, onwards:
1. Shes rab dbang rgyal
2. Zla ba grags pa
363



3. Nam mkha' dbang rgyal
4. Tshul khrims mchog Idan
5. bsTan pa 'brug grags (b.1946), the present abbot
sMon rgyal Monastery is composed of two parts: the upper monastery (var dgon),
and the lower monastery (mar dgon). According to oral tradition, the yar dgon was
built by the first Kun grol, but there is no mention of this in his biography. The
latter's son Bla rgan Gyal sras built the Ha gsar khang temple. The monastery was
destroyed during the Cultural Revolution and was rebuilt in the 1980s.
4. Hierarchical system
-dgon bdag
- mkhan po
- one dbu mdzad
- two dge skos,
- two mchod dpon
- one "cham dpon
- three rgyu gnyer (one is rgyu dpon and the other two rgyu gnyer)
- two 'bud pa (musicians)
The incumbents of the above-listed positions are reappointed every four years,
the mkhan po's position is permanent. In this case, the mkhan po replaces the master
of the monastery in his absence and is selected among the most academically and
spiritually accomplished monks of the monastery.
5. Number of monks
There are ninety novices and monks in the monastery.
6. Curent education
One of the two dge bskos teaches Tibetan and religious practice to the novices
throughout the year exept for one month holiday in winter and one month holiday in
summer. For more advanced training, the students generally go to Shar rdza ri khrod
for further training
7. Educational exchange
A saint from sMon rgyal Monastery called Grub thob A stag kha ba rjes med
founded A stag khang tshan, a monastic hostel, in sMan ri in gTsang, reserved for
the monk students from rDza khog, Me nyag, sDe dge, Nyag rong, 'Dan ma and
sGe bshes khog (in Rong brag of rGyal rong). As a result, Mon rgyal Monastery
developed close ties with sMan ri. For the past few decades however, because of
the influence of Shar rdza bra shis rgyal mtshan's teachings, monasteries in the
region, including sMon rgyal, have been sending their monk students to Shar rdza ri
364



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
khrod for further training, rMon rgyal Monastery has four branches (dgon lag): Khro
tshang (No.135), 'Bum rmad (No.137), Zer 'phro (No.140) and Gong lung (No.149).
8/9. Rituals
- 1st month : the performance of the ritual based on the Zhi khro dam pa rig
brgya dkyil 'khor from the 8th to the 22nd day
- 5th month : the observance of the smyung gnas fast from the 8th to the 20th
day;
- 6th month: the dbyar gnas summer-fast from the 1st to the 30th day
- 9th month: the recitation of the mantra snying po rnam gsum and the sidhi for
7 days
- Ilth month: the dgu gtor rite based on the performance of the Zhi khro cycle
rom the 21st to the 30th
Daily life of the individual monks:
In the morning: the monks begin the day with the meditation on the root Guru
(rtsa ba'i bla ma), and then chant the prayers: Bla ma rgvang 'bod, rТsa ba 'l bla
ma'i gsol 'debs, rТsa rlung gsol 'debs, Rlung thun gcig bcad, Sems sbyong, Yi dam
zhi drag; this is followed by the purificatory ritual of bsang, the practice of the
phyag salutation and and the chu gtor ceremony of water offering.
The afternoon is devoted to reading and recitation
In the late afternoon: chanted invocation of the religious protectors (srung ma'i
gsol kha), followed by the practices of minor rituals such as the lus sbyong, the sems
sbyong the bsur and the good.
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has an old incomplete manuscript copy of the Bonpo Kanjur;
three copies of the printed edition of the Kanjur published by SMon rgyal Iha sras,
one copy of the printed edition of Buddhist Kanjur and a collection of various texts
for liturgical purposes. The monastery formerly possessed three copies of the Bonpo
Kanjur: one Khro skyabs edition and two manuscripts. Both manuscript copies
came from the Hor region. The 6th Kun grol was the spiritual master of the king of
Hor (Hor spyi khyab rgyal po), who ruled over what was known as the "Thirty-nine
Tribes of Hor". One day he had a dream in which a mkha''gro ma told him to build
a stupa to be dedicated to sTag la at Hor lan stod and another to be dedicated to
Phur pa at Lan sog sum mdo. He did as instructed in the dream and the king of Hor
offered him a manuscript copy of the Bonpo Kanjur in gratitude for having built
the two stupas on his estates. However, the 6th Kun grol did not want to accept the
Kanjur and had two copies made instead. A great number of people were hired for
the purpose and the work was supervised by ICang 'jug dBal gas thar, the minister
365



of the king of Hor.
The 6th Kun grol finally brought his two copies of the Kanjur to sMon rgyal
Monastery in 1954
11. Income and expenses
The monastery has 'bri (female yak) which are tended by several local families
in accordance with the shi med contract.
12. Local community
The lha sde local lay community) of the monastery consists of eight villages:
gSer mda' with ten families, Khang gsar with fourteen families, dGon nang with
twenty-seven families, Rabs mang with thirteen families, 'Gul ba with four families,
A khod with twenty families, dGe nang with seventeen families and sDe chung with
a few families.
13. Local festivals
The mountain behind the monastery is called Khyung mo dpal ri. The la btsas
on top of the mountain is dedicated to the local deity known as Shwa mdzo gnyan
po dkar phyogs. The mountain is a combination of the cult of the local deity and a
sacred site of the gnas ri type.
The propitiation and circumambulation of the mountain, by both monks and
laymen, takes place on the 18th day of the 5th month.
There are four additional mountains, gNas rgod rta rna mdung rtse in the cast,
sTag sham gnyan po in the south, gSe dal gnam Icags thog rgod in the west and De'u
dpon gNam lha dkar g-yag in the north, each has a deity bearing the same name and
a la btsas on its summit. They are propitiated by the Bonpo lay community once a
year.
The monastery also has a cemetery known as gSer mdo bo che, located in gSer
lung valley, a two hours' walk northwest of the monastery.
On the 12th of the 8th month, the lay people perform the sa zhib, 'land
inspection', a special custom during which the local population first receive a
blessing in the morning from the guardian deity of the monastery in front of the
sgrub khang sanctuary, and then a group of horsemen inspect the monastery's
estates, to check whether the pastures, forests, paths, etc, belonging to the monastery
are in good condition, whether anything has been stolen and whether any strangers
are occupying the land. Once they have completed their round, they disperse without
returning to the monastery.
14. Occupation of the local people
Farming, animal husbandry and trade
366



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
Sources
(1) Interviews (autumn 1997): Tshe brtan rdo rje, a monk at the monastery and
teacher at the Sichuan School of Tibetan Language in Dartsedo (b.1948); gYung
drung 'phrin las, a monk at the monastery (b.1957); Pad ma skal bzang, a monk
at the monastery (b.1928); Nam mkha' bstan 'dzin (b.1931), a monk at the
monastery; Pad ma dbang rgyal (b.1928), a monk from the monastery
(137) 'Bum rmad Monastery
1. Name
Since 'Bum mda' village, the lha sde (the local lay community of the
monastery) considers the monastery's site to be the best in the region, the monastery
was named 'Bum rmad, ('bum after the name of the village, and rmad meaning
'best').
2. Location
The monastery is on the north bank of the rDza chu river, about three and half
hours on horseback from sMon rgyal Monastery which is located southeast of 'Bum
rmad Monastery on the east bank of the rDza chu river.
3. History
There is a short text written by the administrative committee of the monastery
which states that the monastery was founded by the fourteenth Me'u bSod nams
dbang grags in the Wood-Dog Year of the 2nd Rab byung (1094). According to
m Thu stobs rnma rgyal, who is the present rgyal tshab of Shar rdza bra shis
rgyal mtshan and master of 'Bum rmad Monastery, first there was a monastery
on the south bank of rDza chu river. As it was located close to a rock called Gya
rdzong brag, the monastery was named Gya rdzong Monastery.bSod nams dbang
grags appointed Bra bla Nam mkha' blo gros as his successor. Under kun grol
'Ja'tshon snying po (b.1700), after the succession of the monastery's eleventh
abbot (after the accession of Kun grol 'Ja' tshon snying po (b.1700), the eleventh
abbot), the monastery was moved to the north bank of the river, where its local lay
community lived, and the name of the monstery was changed to 'Bum rmad. As
far as we know he was succeeded by gYung drung mam rgyal, born in rDza yul,
and was then recognized as the reincarnation of his predecessor? g Yung drung mam
rgyal's incarnation seems to have been dBon sprul bsTan pa rgyal mtshan who was
recognized by dGe bshes gSang sngags grags pa. The following reincarnation was
Ye shes bstan'dzin, recognized by g Ter chen bDe gling pa. Ye shes bstan'dzin was
succeeded by Mi pham rnam rgyal. His successor was dGe sprul Yid bzhin legs
367



grub (d.1952), recognized by Kun grol bDud 'dul gling pa. The reincarnation of
dGe sprul Yid bzhin legs grub was 'Chi med zla ba yid bzhin rgya mtsho (b.1978,
also known as 'Chi med zla ba ye shes), recognized by Tshul chen Trulku of rTogs
Idan Monastery in rNga khog. The last abbot of the monastery, mThu stobs rnam
rgyal was born in 1926. He became a monk in 'Bum rmad Monastery at the age of
eight. The following year, Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan, sensing that his life
and hence his contribution to the Bon religion were coming to an end, decided to
perform the Phyi rgyud cho ga bcu gnyis empowerment ceremony, which was to be
his last, mThu stobs ram rgyal participated in the empowerment ceremony. Shortly
after Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan "passed away into his rainbow body. mThu
stobs rnam rgyal studied under Blo gros rgya mtsho, the apostle (rgyal tshab) of
Shar rdza bra shis rgyal mtshan, Gling zhig Tshe dbang g-yung drung and various
other masters. At the age of thirteen, he became a disciple of Kun grol hum chen and
studied with him for nine years. At the age of twenty-two, he went to central Tibet
on a pilgrimage to Bon ri, Yar lung, rGyal rtse, bkra shis lhun po, Zhu tshang, Sa
skya, gShen Dar sding, mKhar sna, sMan ri, g Yung drung gling, Sera, 'Bras spungs,
dGa'Idan and a number of other sacred sites. When he returned to rDza khog, he
became the teacher of sMon rgyal lha sras, a son of Kun grol hum chen. Kun grol
hum chen died when mThu stobs rnam rgyal was thirty-one years old. In 1984
mThu stobs rnam rgyal was chosen as the rgyal tshab of Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal
mtshan. He has greatly contributed to the development of Bon religion, particularly
the teachings of Shar rdza bra shis rgyal mtshan, at Shar rdza Hermitage. In 1993,
A g-yung, who was on a visit to the hermitage, officially confirmed his appointment
as the rgyal tshab, with the approval of the government of dKar mdzes prefecture. In
1986, the main building of 'Bum rmad Monastery which served as a granary during
the Cultural Revolution was restored by mThu stobs rnam rgyal.
4. Hierarchical system
- one mkhan po
- one dbu mdzad
- one dge skos
- one 'cham dpon
- one mchod dpon
- one mchod g-yog
- one 'bud pa (who blows the conch shell)
- one dbyar bdag (leader of the dbyar gnas ritual)
Their term of duty is three years.
5. Curent number of monks
There are about sixty monks and novices in the monastery
368



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
6. Current education
The young monks are taught basic Tibetan and religious doctrine. They have
daily lessons, one lesson in the morning and another in the afternoon and get five
days off in autumn to help their families with the harvest. The religious teachings are
based on the following texts: Ma tri sgrub sbyong, mDo g-yung drung klong rgyas,
rNam par rgyal ba, Byams ma, Sa bdag 'khrugs bcos, sPyi spungs skor gsum, gSas
mkhar mchog Inga, gSang engags ma rgpud, Rigs Inga bde gshegs 'dus pa, Zhi khro
and gDugs dkar.
7. Educational exchange
In the past, 'Bum rmad was a branch monastery of Mon rgyal located in the
same area. Monks are sent to Shar rdza Hermitage for religious study and practice.
8/9. Rituals
- 1st month: rituals based on the texts such as mDo g-yung drung klong rgyas
and gSang sngags ma rgyud as well as Rig 'dzin bde gshegs 'dus pa by Shar
rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan and Zhi khro dgongs 'dus by Kun grol 'Ja'tshon
snying po followed by a 'cham dance. The dates for these rituals are not fixed
and may be performed any time in the 1st month; the length depends on the
amount of funding received.
- 5th month: rituals based on the cycles of Khro bo and Phur pa. The dbyar
gnas ceremony is performed by the monks in the dge Ishul grade and there are
usually about only twenty-five of them.
- 8th month: observation of the smyung gnas fast
- 11th month: the bum sgrub ritual based on the tradition of Mi shig rdo rje
- Starting on the 21st day of the 12th month: ritual based on the cycle of Khro
bo, ending with a "cham performance for three days from the 27th to the 29th.
Apart from the last ritual in the 12th month, none of the rituals have fixed
dates and may be performed anytime in the prescribed month.
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has one copy of the Kanjur published by A g-yung and skal
bzang phun tshogs in Chengdu 1985-1987; one copy of the Collected Works of
mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan; about twenty volumes of Bonpo tantras, De
chen gling pa's collected works in twelve volumes), Kun grol 'ja' tshon snying po's
collected works in twelve volumes), Shar rdza bra shis rgyal mtshan's collected
works (in twelve volumes), the Tshe dbang bka'thang (in four volumes), and gSang
sngags gling pa's collected works in thirteen volumes).
369



11. Income and expenses
The monastery has neither fields nor animals; the monks provide their own
food.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of three villages: "Bum mda' with thirty-three
families (one hundred and ninety people), Ra 'og with forty-six families (two
hundred and sixty-four people), and Re mda' with fifteen families (ninety-two
people).
13. Local festivals
The sacred mountain (gnas rí) called Shar rdza gYung drung Ihun po is less
than 1 km southeast of the monastery. It is said that the place was opened' (gnas
sgo phyed pa) by gSang sngags gling pa in a Tiger Year and is venerated every Tiger
Year. In accordance with tradition, the hermits of Shar rdza Hermitage together
with the monks from 'Bum rmad and sTeng chen monasteries begin the mountain's
veneration on a suitable day in summer. They must camp one night at each of the
cardinal points around the mountain. The lay community of the Bonpo monasteries
in the Shar rdza area also participate.
An empowerment ceremony is performed at each of the four points. Each
ceremony is based on one of the twelve divinities drawn from the Dri med gzi brjid
by Blo ldan snying po. The divinities are: bDer gshegs kun rig, Kun bzang rgyal ba
rgya mtsho, bDer gshegs sMon lam mtha' yas and dBang Idan dus 'khor.
The mountain is also regarded as the residence of the local deities (yul Iha).
There is a white rock on the mountain which is believed to be the abode of a local
deity called bka' gnyan Dung dkar mar rgyan. Its date of propitiation is not fixed
and is determined by divination each year. Another local deity called Zhe chen stag
mgo is believed to reside in the mountain. This deity is propitiated twice a year, in
the 1st and 5th months, the exact dates are determined each year by divination. Both
deities are propitiated mainly by the local lay people.
14. Economic occupation of the local population
Farmers and nomads.
Sources
(1) Interviews in autumn 1997: mThu stobs rnam rgyal, the rgyal tshab of Shar rdza
Hermitage, also a monk and the master of 'Bum rmad Monastery, born in 1926.
(2) Texts:
- r Dza 'bum rmad dgon gyi lo rgyus compiled by the committee called 'Bum
rmad dgon pa'i bdag gnyer tshogs chung in 1994, MS
370



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(138) Shar rdza Hermitage
1. Name
As its name indicates, it is a hermitage founded by Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal
mtshan (1858-1934). Since the mountain on which the hermitage is located is called
Gyer bza', the hermitage is also referred to as Gyer bza' Ri khrod.
2. Location
The hermitage is located on the northeast bank of the rDza chu river, about two
hours on horseback from 'Bum rmad Monastery (No.137) following the track along
the river. There is no motorable road leading to the hermitage.
3. History
Shar rdza bKra shis rgyal mtshan is the most famous and important Bonpo
master and scholar in the 20th century. He is believed to have obtained the 'rainbow
body' ('ja'lus). His popularity and influence over the Bonpo community and culture
continue to grow, especially in Khams and Amdo where more and more statues of
him are appearing in Bonpo and even Buddhist monasteries. Both an accomplished
spiritual master and scholar, his teachings, contained within the eighteen volumes of
his collected works, have become a fundamental reference in Bon. His history of the
Bon religion was translated into English and analyzed by Samten G. Karmay, and
published under the title of the Treasury of Good Sayings: A Tibetan History of Bon
(London Oriental Series, Vol.26, Oxford University Press, 1972).
At the age of thirty-three, Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan (1890, the
biography, pp. 112-119) established the hermitage; during his life time, it was
occupied only by his disciples who gathered there to receive his teachings and
practise meditation under his guidance. After his extraordinary death at the
hermitage, the place became a holy site not only for Bonpos, but also for Buddhists,
and large gatherings of Bonpo tantric practitioners from Khams and Amdo take
place there. As a result the hermitage has been enlarged and has become one of
Tibet's major religious sites. Shar rdza b ra shis rgyal mtshan's original hermitage
(where he lived and practised), the bDe chen ri khrod, is located on the upper part of
the mountain and commonly referred to as Ri khrod gong ma, 'upper hermitage'.
The hermitage's small printing house (par khang) and meditation cells are
located on the lower part of the mountain and are known as Ri khrod zhol ma,
'lower hermitage
4. Hierarchical system
Before his death, Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan appointed his nephew
Blo gros rgya mtsho (1915-1954) as his apostle (rgyal tshab) at the hermitage, but



the latter died at the age of forty. Before Blo gros rgya mtsho left for Lhasa, he
appointed Zer 'phro Tshul khrims dbang phyug as his rgyal tshab, the latter died
in 1960. In 1984, mThu stobs rnam rgyal of 'Bum rmad Monastery was elected
as the rgyal tshab but after twelve years, relations between sTeng chen Monastery
(No.139) and the rgyal tshab became strained and so the latter returned to 'Bum
rmad, his original monastery, A 'jigs, a monk from Ye shes Monastery (No.150)
in Nyag rong, is now in charge of the hermitage. When I visited Shar rdza ri
khrod in August 1997, fourteen monks from Khams and Amdo were practising at
the hermitage under his guidance. He must be in his thirties and is called mKhan
chung, younger abbot' by the monks at the hermitage, although his appointment is
temporary and unofficial.
5. Current number of monks
There are fourteen monks residing at the hermitage.
6. Current education
Shar rdza ri khrod is a place reserved for individual religious practice,
particularly the three-year retreat. Practitioners at the hermitage may also receive
special teachings and tantric empowerments from the mkhan po and other masters,
7. Educationa exchange
Before Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan's time, Bonpo monasteries sent their
monks to sMan ri to study philosophy and practice meditattion. Indeed, sMan ri and
gYung drung gling were the only place for Bonpo monks to pursue their studies and
obtain the dge bshes degree (for an account of the two monasteries see Nos. 1 and 2).
Monks who had been to these two monasteries were generally highly respected back
in their own monasteries. Although this is still true to some extent, the situation has
changed considerably since the Cultural Revolution. Thus Man ri and gYung drung
gling no longer receive the support it used to and are gradually losing their influence
throughout the whole Tibetan cultural area; they no longer run the complete
programme of Bonpo studies leading to the dge bshes degree which formerly
ks from as far as Amdo and Khams. In the meantime Shar rdza bra
shis rgyalmtshan's influence, owing to his scholarly and spiritual accomplishments
and miraculous death, has been steadily growing, and, moreover, Shar rdza
Hermitage is much closer than sMan ri or gYung drung gling for the Bonpo monks
of Amdo and Khams. Thus, at present most Bonpo monasteries in Amdo and Khams
send their monks to Shar rdza Hermitage instead of sMan ri or gYung drung gling,
The number of monks at the hermitage varies and there is a constant turn over. In
the last fifteen years, Derge county government founded several religous schools
for monks of all different religious traditions and Shar rdza Hermitage was included
372



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
among the schools for Bonpo teachings and thus may officially accept monks, but
the educational system remains traditional and it is still mainly a retreat center.
8/9. Rituals
Since Shar rdza Hermitage is not a monastery, apart from the occasional
empowerment ceremonies, there are no collective rituals or ceremonies.
10. Books held in the monastery
The hermitage has a small traditional printing house, and owns some printing
woodblocks (par shing).
11. Income and expenses
The practitioners residing at the hermitage must provide their own food; the
hermitage receives offerings from the faithful in the form of rtsam pa, yak meat, etc,
which it keeps for visitors.
13. Local community
The entire population of the Shar rdza area is Bonpo. There are four Bonpo
monasteries around the hermitage: 'Bum rmad, sTeng chen (No.139), Zer 'phro
(No.140) and Phen zhol (No.141), with their respective local lay communities. The
hermitage however does not have a specific community.
14. Occupation of the local population
Mainly farmers and some nomads
Sources
(1) Interviews (August 1997): mThu stobs rnam rgyal (b.1926), the rgyal tshab of
Shar rdza Hermitage, and the head of 'Bum rmad Monastery
(2) Texts:
- Je btshun bla ma dam pa nges pa don gyi g-yung drung 'chang dbang dpal
shar rdza ba chen po bkra shis rgyal mtshan dpal bzang po 'i rnam par thar
pa ngo mtshar nor bu'i phreng ba thar 'dod mkhas pa'i mgul rgyan by dBra
ston bskal bzang bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan (1897-1959), Beijing: Krung go bod
kyi shes rig dpe skrun khang, 1990
373



(139) rDza sTeng chen Monastery
1. Name
Dza sTeng chen Monastery has several names, the original name was bs Tan
pa 'gyur med sTeng chen rnam rgyal gling. Following its destruction in 1902 by the
monks of don gsar Monastery located in the vicinity, the monastery was rebuilt
and renamed dPal gShen bstan mdo sngags g-yung drung dar rgyas gling.
2. Location
de
The monastery is three hours on horseback from Nya 'gug Township which
is located 248 km northeast from Derge county town. The monastery stands on the
north bank of the rDza chu river (Ya long jiang in Chinese) which runs through
Derge to dKar mdzes (Gan zi) county along a northwest-southeast axis.
3. History
There are two versions: according to the rDza sTeng chen dgon gyi lo rgyus
by Tshe dbang 'gyur med, the monastery was founded by Me'u Ayu dang ra,
according another one it was founded by Me'u Grub chen Nam mkha' g-yung
drung.
The monastery's original name was bsTan pa 'gyur med sTeng chen rnam
rgyal gling. At first, the family of rMe'u, who was based in gTsang, was in charge
of the monastery, but unfortunately the history of this lineage remains obscure.
However, later dBra ston Ha yi blo gros (his dates are not known, but he is believed
to have been a contemporary of 'Gro mgon 'Phags pa, 1235-1280) from dBra dgon
Monastery in Kar mdzes came to sTeng chen where he later settled and hence
started a rMe'u lineage. It is said that dBra ston founded twenty monasteries in
dBus gtsang, Khams and Amdo. He extended sTeng chen Monastery by building
the gTsug lag khang and also enlarged the temple. His successor was dBra pa
'Dul ba rgyal mtshan who received his ordination from mNyam med Shes rab rgyal
mtshan, founder of Man ri Monastery. dBra pa 'Dul ba rgyal mtshan first went to
g Yas ru dBen sa kha Monastery in gTsang. He is referred to as 'Gro mgon dBra
ston chen mo and is said to be one of the Eighteen Masters (ston pa bco brgyad) of
gYas ru dben sa Monastery. He was succeeded in turn by dBra pa Tshul khrims rgyal
mtshan who studied the A khrid, rDzogs chen and Nyan rgyud traditions under
rMe'u mKhas pa dPal chen. The period from Tshul khrims rgyal mtshan's time to
that of dBra ba skal bzang nyi ma remains obscure. dBra ba skal bzang nyi ma was
born in the Iron-Hare Year in the 15th Rab byung (1891). During his time, in 1902,
sTeng chen Monastery was burned down by the monks of the nearby de lugs pa
monastery of dGon gsar, because the dGon gsar monks believed that the assembly
hall of sTeng chen prevented the sunlight from reaching their monastery (i.e. the
374



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
monks of dGon gsar Monastery were jealous of the height and grandeur of s Teng
chen Monastery). I am sure there are two sides to this story but unfortunately I could
not find any source containing dGon gsar Monastery's version of the events. In any
case the monastery was burned down by the dGon gsar monks and more than twenty
buildings and all the statues and texts within were completely destroyed. skal bzang
nyi ma fled to Hor in the Nag chu kha region, and the elder monks to gSer thar
pasture.
In 1905, sTeng chen Monastery sent a group of representatives from steng
chen and other monasteries, accompanied by two IDing dpon officers from Nyag
rong to Lhasa to request permission to rebuild the monastery. gNas brtan g Yung
drung bstan pa, the representative of sTeng chen Monastery, related the events to
the sPyi khyab mKhan po of the ba' shag in Lhasa (the highest monk official in
the Dalai Lama's government), who reported the story to the 13th Dalai Lama
The Dalai Lama granted the monastery permission to rebuild and the sPyi khyab
mkhan po sent a government representative together with A rta, one of the IDing
dpon officers of Nyag rong, to rDza khog to act as mediators between the two
monasteries. 1908 marked the beginning of the monastery's reconstruction. The
work was supervised by dBra spyul skal bzang nyi ma and dBra dpon Nam rgyal
grags pa, the local chief. Shar rdza bra shis rgyal mtshan and dBra sras Zla ba
grags pa also largely contributed to the reconstruction and revival of the monastery.
In 1916, the work was completed and the monastery was renamed dPal gShen bstan
mdo sngags g-yung drung bstan rgyas gling. Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan was
responsible for the iconographic programme of its interior decoration. Many famous
Bonpo masters visited the monastery, including Khro tshang 'Brug Iha, gSer chen
Sangs rgyas gling pa, Kun grol 'ja' tshon snying po, mKhan chen Nyi ma bstan
dzin, and the three lineages of dBra, Cang and sMon", (dBra ICang sMon gsum):
1. the masters of the dBra lineage from sTeng chen Monastery
2. the masters of the Cang lung lineage from Cang lung Monastery (No.158)
3. the masters of the Mon rgyal lineage from Mon rgyal Monastery (No.136)
sTeng chen Monastery was famous for a number of its practitioners who
obtained the rainbow-body' ja 'lus) at the time of their deaths. The monastery was
again destroyed during the Cultural Revolution and was rebuilt in the 1980s. It has
preserved some 229 sq m of its original wall paintings.
4. Hierarchical system
- one mkhan po
- one dbu mdzad
- one dge skos
- two mchod dpon
-three khang gnyer
375



- two 'cham gnyer
- eighteen spyi ba: two for the ritual of Thang chen tshogs pa, two for the ritual
of Nya tshogs, two for the ritual of Man Iba, two for bDe 'dus, four for the
observance of the summer-fast (dbyar gnas), two for the dgu gtor rite and two
for the ritual of bon gzhi
5. Current number of monks
There are sixty-three novices and monks in the monastery.
6. Educational exchange
One of the educated monks is appointed to teach the young students Tibetan
literacy and ritual texts for three or four years, after which they are expected to
practice on their own.
7. Exchanges with other monasteries
Monk students have to go to sMan ri or gYung drung gling in g Tsang to take
their ordination, but for other religious practice they generally go to Shar rdza ri
khrod (No.138). Both Zer 'phro (No.140) and 'Phen zhol (No. 141) are branches
of sTeng chen Monastery, and the monks of both monasteries go to sTeng chen for
major rituals.
8/9. Rituals
- 1st Tibetan month: commemoration of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan
based on the mDo g-yung drung klong rgyas for twenty-seven days beginning
on the 12th day. The ceremony is also known as nya Ishogs.
- 4th month: rituals of sMan lha and the observance of a fast (smyung gnas) for
fifteen days
- 5th month: the ritual based on the bDe 'dus (bde gshegs 'dus pa'i bum
sgrub chen mo) by Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan for fifteen days
- 6th month: the summer-fast (dbyar gnas) for fourteen days
- 11th month: ritual cycle of Khro bo for nine days ending with the 'cham
dance for the lay community
- 12th month: ritual cycles of Khro bo and Phur pa for nine days ending with
'cham dance for the lay community. This last ritual performance is also
known as bon gzhi or sometimes chos gzhi in this monastery.
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has one complete copy of the printed edition of the Bonpo
Kanjur, copies of the Collected Works of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan and
the Collected Works of Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan as well as a collection of
376



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
various texts for liturgical use
11. Income and expenses
The monastery has neither land nor animals, and depends on donations from the
faithful; the monks provide their own food.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of five villages: Wa thung with forty nine
families, Shog mthor with sixty-four families, Zam kha with thirty-one families, Ra
la with twenty-nine families and Ting nang with forty families.
13. Local festivals
The mountain behind the monastery is known as Se mo g-yu rtse and is
associated with the local deity of the same name.
14. Occupation of the local population
The members of the first four villages mentioned above are both farmers and
nomads while those of the fifth are nomads.
Sources
(1) Interviews: bs Tan 'dzin 'gyur med (b.1935), a monk at the monastery; Lung rig
mnam dag (b.1937), a monk at the monastery
(2) Texts:
- Dza steng chen dgon gyi lo rgyus by rDza pa Tshe ring 'gyur med
- Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan gvi rnam thar by dBra ston bsKal bzang
bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan, Beijing: Krung go bod kyi shes rig dpe skrun khang,
1990
(140) Zer 'phro Monastery
1. Name
The full name is Zer 'phro bSam gtan g-yung drung gling.
2. Location
The monastery is located on the west bank of the rDza chu river in Dza khog.
When I visited it in August 1997, I left from s Teng chen Monastery and had to cross
the river on a wooden raft consisting of four tree trunks. From the opposite bank it
took me about half an hour on horseback via a village to reach the monastery which
is located at the foot of a mountain.
377



3. History
According to oral tradition, the monastery was founded by g Yung drung
rnam rgyal with the financial support of Gling tshang, one of the leading families
in Derge, around eight hundreds years ago. Later the monastery was destroyed by
a flood, which according to popular belief, was caused by the local deities who
were offended by the monastery's gold roof. Following this episode it was rebuilt
by Nyag rong bra shis dge legs, a disciple of Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan.
It became a branch of sMon rgyal Monastery (No.136). In the 15th Rab byung
(1867-1926), it became a branch of rDza sTeng chen Monastery and has remained as
such until now.
The monastery is headed by abbots. Since Shar rdza is a very isolated and
poor area, it took several generations to complete the monastery's reconstruction.
Nyag rong bkra shis dge legs, who undertook the monastery's reconstruction,
built an assembly hall ('du khang), and two sanctuaries for the atonement (sgrub
khang). The second abbot, Phun tshogs blo gros, made a large statue callled IHa
chen, and painted the murals within the sgrub khang. The third abbot, Tshul khrims
dar rgyas, built a kitchen and rebuilt another sgrub khang, and also introduced
a system allowing the monastery to finance four monks at a time to do two-year
tantric practice in the sgrub khang, The fourth abbot, Shes rab bstan 'dzin, travelled
throughout Nyag rong and Khyung po to give teachings and collect funds for the
monastery with which he built thirty small buildings for sheltering prayer-wheels
(khor chung), a small ma ti mantra wheel, and four large cauldrons (mtshogs
zangs) and other cooking utensils for the monastery. The fifth abbot, rTogs Idan
bsTan 'dzin blo gros, commissioned copper statues of the gNas brtan bcu drug (the
"sixteen direct disciples of the Buddha"), Gu ru mtshan brgyad (the weight aspects of
Padmasambhava"), and gilded statues of the Buddhas of the Three Ages. The sixth
abbot, rTogs Idan Zla ba rgyal mtshan, travelled to central Tibet whence he returned
with the collected works of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan (1356-1415), two
conches and three statues. The seventh abbot, dBang li, a disciple of Shar rdza bra
shis rgyal mtshan, repaired the assembly hall and built a wheel containing more
than one hundred million ma ti mantras (stong 'khor). He is said to have passed
away in his "rainbow body" ('ja'lus). The eighth abbot, bskal bzang bstan 'dzin,
built a gold stupa (gser gdung mchod rten) and acquired more than forty volumes
of tantric texts for the monastery. rTogs Idan Mi pham rnam rgyal and g Yung drung
nyi ma, commissioned statues of the thirty-five Buddhas (Itung gshags so Inga) and
furnished the monastery with other religious relics. The tenth abbot, Nam mkha'
grags pa, acquired the complete works of Kun grol 'ja' tshon snying po and gTer
ston gSang sngags gling pa, and more than forty thangkhas for the monastery. Shes
rab phun tshogs and Nam mkha' ye shes, established a philosophical college (bshad
gwra). The twelfth abbot, Tshul khrims dbang rgyal, founded a printing house
378



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
containing more than a thousand printing blocks. As a very rare exception, there
were dKon mchog, dBang Idan, mThar phyin and Gyal mchog: dkon mchog was
a very learned master and introduced a ritual of bDe 'dus sgrub mchod which the
monastery performs on the 15th day of the 5th month; dBang Idan was also mgon
khang bla ma, mThar phyin was the head of the bshad grwa at the same time; Gyal
mchog was a gCod pa, one who practices mainly gCod. There were three fourteenth
abbots bs Tan pa dkon mchog, Tshe ring dpal bzang and Nyi ma grags pa, until the
mid-20th century.
The monastery suffered from destruction in the 1980s, it was rebuilt by bSod
nams blo gros, dBra sras bSod nams lha rgyal and dBra sras Yid bzhin dbang rgyal,
the last three abbots of the monastery.
The above information was provided by the Zer 'phro dgon pa'i lo rgyus by
Dza pa Tshe ring 'gyur med which unfortunately does not give dates or details of
the abbots' life stories.
4. Hierarchical system
- one mkhan po
- one slob dpon
- one dbu mdzad
- one dge skos
- one mchod dpon
- one bdag gnyer
- one rtsis pa
All the incumbents are reappointed every three years.
5. Number of monks
There are twenty novices and monks in the monastery.
6. Education
This monastery is a practising place (sgrub grwa) rather than a place for study.
It specializes mainly in meditation practice in accordance with the trantric tradition.
A teacher (slob dpon) is appointed to train the young novices. For major calendrical
rituals they go and join their brethren at sTeng chen Monastery.
7. Exchanges with other monasteries
The monks used to go to sMan ri to take their full ordination and Shar rdza ri
khrod for the three-year retreat and other practices.
8/9. Rituals
The performance of rituals in this monastery is much the same as those of
379



sTeng chen Monastery (No.139).
Toron
10. Books held in the monastery
The printed editions: one copy of the Bonpo Kanjur, one copy of mNyam med
Shes rab rgyal mtshan's and Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan's collected works,
bDe chen gling pa's collected works in thirteen volumes.
There are about thirty-five volumes of Bonpo tantras and other texts mostly
manuscripts.
11. Income and expenses
The tenth Panchen Lama gave the monastery twelve thousand Chinese Yuan
for the reconstruction of the monastery. The monks provide their own food. The
monastery does not pursue any economic activities.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of seven villages: Kham be village with six
families, Wa pa with nine fimilies, Ser skya dgon with eighteen families, rNa bzhi
with seven families, 'Khor lo with six families, Ma rtsa with five families and 'Od
dwangs with ten families.
13. Local festivals
The mountain behind the monastery is called A myes Gyal po. There is a la
btsas halfway up the mountain. Its renewal ceremony and the propitiation of the
local deity take place on the 15th day of the 4th month and attended by both lay and
monastic communities.
14. Occupation of the local population
Mostly farmers and some nomads
Sources
(1) Interviews in August 1997. gSal gong (b.1965), a monk and head of the
administrative committee of the monastery, Bu sngon (b.1965), a monk and
vice-head of the administrative committee of the monastery
(2) Texts:
-Zer 'phro dgon pa'i lo rgyus by rDza pa Tshe ring 'gyur med, MS. 3 folios;
KGLG, Vol.1, pp.636-639
380



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai. Gansu and Sichuan
(141) 'Phen zhol Monastery
1. Name
'Phen zhol Bon gling g-yung drung dgon. It is also known known as 'Phen zhol
Bon po dgon or dGon chung dgon.
2. Location
It is located on the same side of the river as Zer 'phro Monastery. From Zer
"phro Monastery it takes around one and a half hours on horseback following the
river southwards. There are only two very narrow trails along either bank of the
river.
3. History
According to oral tradition, the monastery was founded by Shes rab bstan
'dzin in the Wood-Bird Year of the 9th Rab byung (1525). Its subsequent history
remains unknown. During the Cultural Revolution it was destroyed and was rebuilt
in the nineteen-eighties. There are 158 sq m of ancient wall-paintings inside the
surviving building of the original monastery. The monastery was run by a succession
of abbots. Unfortunately, their names and chronology remain unknown. Those still
remembered by the monks and local community are: bSod nams rgyal mtshan, a
disciple of Kun grol 'ja' tshon snying po, Khro bo tshe brtan, Nam mkha' tshe brtan,
gCod pa smon lam, Padma, Nyi li, dPal 'byung, Ri g-yang, Byang chub, Tshul
khrims mchog rgyal, and Rin chen tshe dbang,
4. Hierarchical system
- one bla ma
- one mkhan po
- one dbu mdzad
- one dge skos
- one mchod dpon
- two bdag gnyer2
- one mgon bla
The incumbents are replaced every two years, with the exception of the mkhan
po whose position is permanent.
5. Current number of monks
There are eighteen monks and novices in the monastery.
6. Current education
For several years the young monks are taught by a teacher appointed by the
381



monastery, after which they begin to practise on their own.
7. Educational exchange
The monastery traditionally sent its monks to sMan ri in g Tsang to take their
ordination, but at present they go to Shar rdza hermitage to take their vows and
receive further training. The monastery was formerly a branch of sMon rgyal, but is
presently a branch of sTeng chen.
8/9. Rituals
In summer the monastery performs the rituals based on the bDe mchog kun rig
gnas chog and bDe gshegs 'dus pa'i sgrub mchod; in autumn, the propitiation of
the religious protectors of Bon (bon skyong mchod gsol); in winter, the dgu gtor rite
based on the cycle of a tutelary deity (yi dam).
In summer the monks of 'Phen zhol and s Teng chen perform the tshes bcu
ceremony together in 'Phen zhol and the dgu gtor rite at sTeng chen at the end of the
year.
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has two complete copies of the Kham chen (in sixteen volumes
each), a copy of the Dri med gzi brjid (in twelve volumes) and around twelve
volumes of liturgical texts.
11. Economic circumstances of the monastery
The tenth Panchen Lama donated twelve thousand Yuan to the monastery. It has
around ten sgro bal of barley and wheat; the profit of which is used for the monastery's
general expenses. The monks must provide their own food.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of six villages: Re pa with twenty-nine
families, bShes pa with two families, Re mo with two families, Bon gnas with two
families, Lo mgo with one family and Chu sgang with one family
13. Local festivals
The are the same as at 'Bum rmad Monastery. However, the mountain behind
the monastery is called Brag ngon brag, the abode of a local deity sPe bo khyung
bdag. There is a la btsas dedicated to the deity and is situated half-way up the
mountain. The celebration of its annual renewal takes place on the 15th day of the
5th month.
382



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
14. Occupation of the local population
Farmers and nomads
Sources
(1) Interviews in August 1997: Shes rab sbyin pa, a monk at the monastery, born in
1966; Yid dga', a monk at the monastery, born in 1975; Sam 'grub, a monk at
the monastery, born in 1974
(2) Texts:
- 'Phen zhol bon dgon gyi lo rgyus by rDza pa Tshe ring 'gyur med, MS
Notes
1 The bla ma in this case is the main spiritual guide of the monastery
2 bdag gnyer, the store keeper and accountant of the monastery
3 sgro ba is the yak-skin sack used to store and transport barley and wheat; cach sgro ba
can hold about 30 kg of barley or wheat. About 20 kg of grain are required to sow a m (a
Chinese term measuring unit corresponding to 6.667 hectares, or 0.165 acres, of farmland)
which means that ten sgro ba of grain = 300 kg) are needed to sow 15 mu of farmland.
(142) Ri spun Monastery
1. Name
Ri spun
2. Location
It is located on a hill behind Hyo pa district administrative seat, 97 km from
Derge, the county seat. Hyo pa means "below" in the local Tibetan dialect.
3. History
There is little information concerning the history of the monastery. The monks
in Ri spun Monastery indicated that their monastery was associated with rDzong
gsar, a Sa skya pa monastery in the same county, and that I would probably find
some information concerning Ri spun in the historical records of rDzong gsar
Monastery. I found only one account of rDzong gsar's history, entitled rDzong gsar
dgon gyi lo gyus (MS, anonymous), but the name of Ri spun is not even mentioned
there. Yet several people, including Buddhists and government officials, also
confirmed the connection between Ri spun and rDzong gsar. Indeed the monasteries
maintain very close ties and rDzong gsar, being the wealthier of the two, even
supports Ri spun Monastery. However, rDzong gsar does not acknowledge its Bon
related origin, not even in its historical records. The local inhabitants say that there
383



is a stone tablet with an inscription concerning the history of Ri spun and rDzong
gsar in the place from Ha tshe dbang of dPal spungs thang on the shore of gSer
ngu g.yu mtsho lake with an inscription concerning the history of Ri spun and
rDzong gsar, but Blo gros phun tshogs, the author of Ri spun dgon gyi lo rgyus,
says that he could not find it. There are ruins of an ancient castle at the top of a hill
near the monastery called Khyung po rdzong, and there are several rather vague
legends concerning its history, but no one seems to know anything precise about it.
According to oral tradition, the monastery was founded in a Fire-Hare Year, but in
which Rab byung remains unknown. It is said that several famous masters, such as
Shar pa rNal 'byor, Khyung po Blo gros rgyal mtshan, Bu 'bor Tog gi rgyal mtshan,
Du tshe rTogs Idan and Ri bla Ye shes stayed at the monastery. In the latter half of
Ri bla Ye shes's life, the monastery was destroyed in a local conflict and that it was
rebuilt by Ri bla Dar rgyas. Unfortunately, the dates of the masters mentioned above
remain unknown. The monastery was destroyed during the Cultural Revolution and
in 1983 permission was granted for its reconstruction.
4. Hierarchical system
There is only one head of the monastery elected by monks and confirmed by
the Religion Department of the Derge county government.
5. Current number of monks
There are fifteen monks in the monastery.
6. Current education
There are no regular, organized classes, the younger monks are trained by the
elder monks in the practice of their ritual tradition.
7. Exchanges with other monasteries
Ri spun and rDzong gsar Monasteries have close ties because rDzong gsar
was originally a Bonpo establishment, but the two have no religious or educational
exchanges since they now belong to different religious traditions.
8/9. Rituals
The monastery performs only two annual rituals: the observance of the smyung
gnas fasting from the 10th to the 13th day of the 5th month, and the dgu gtor rite
based on the ritual cycle of Khro bo from the 26th to the 30th day of the 11th month.
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery possesses texts for its rituals but no other books.
384



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
11. Income and expenses
The government gave the monastery twelve thousand Yuan for its re-
construction. The livelihood of the monks is provided by their families.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of four villages: Ri gyong with forty-three
familes, red thog with twenty-nine families, Rlung sgang with twenty-six families,
and Rlung khog with sixteen families (six hundred and twelve people altogether).
13. Local festivals
The mountain behind the monastery is called IHa rgod, but nothing is known
about its deity. There is a white rock on the mountain east of the monastery which is
associated with a deity called Tis 'dra, but there is no fixed date for its propitiation.
There is a sacred mountain called Phur pa lha khang 5 km east of the
monastery, which was a sacred site venerated annually by both monastic and lay
communities until about the middle of the 20th century. Other local sacred sites
include the ruins of three castles: mkhar nag, 7 km southeast of the monastery,
Ha rgod, 50 m north of the monastery, and gNas nang, 10 km northeast of the
monastery; the local inhabitants claim that a person who has contracted the bad kan
disease may be cured if he circumabulates all three sites within one day, gNas nang
was the residence of Bu 'bor Tog gi rgyal mtshan, and there are still one hundred
and twenty-two Bon po families living in the area. Ten monks from mainly Ri spun
occasionally gather there to perform rituals.
14. Occupation of the local population
Farmers
Sources
(1) Interviews (autumn 1997): bkra shis bzang po (b.1933), a monk at the monastery
(2) Texts:
- Ri spun dgon gyi lo rgyus by Blo gros phun tshogs, MS.
(143) Thar bde Monastery
1. Name of the monastery
Thar bde mi g-yo bsam gtan bon gling
2. Location
Thar bde Monastery is located on the bank of Yangtze, the borderline between
385



TAR and Sichuan Province. It takes two days on horseback to reach there from the
county town of Derge.
3. History
The founder of the monastery, Kun dga' rnam rgyal, had two sons: 1Ha rgyal
'phags and Nyi ma. The former married to ensure the family's descent, while the
later became a monk and succeeded his father, but their dates remain uncertain. It is
said that there were thirteen generations in the Thar bde succession, but, according
to a history of the monastery, the lineage counted in fact seventeen generations. The
monastery was wrecked during the Cultural Revolution and rebuilt in the 1980s.
5. Current number of monks
There are forty novices and monks in the monastery
6. Current education
There are no organized classes. The young novices are trained by the elder
monks.
8/9. Rituals
The bDe chen zhing sgrub from the 1st day of the 1st month. the bDe gling
sa gnyis 'khrug gces from the 16th to the 22nd day of the 1st month; stag la sgrub
mchod from the 20th to the 29th day of the 9th month; Drel dmar for a few days
every month.
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has a printed copy of Kanjur and various ritual texts.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery has no regular source of income and depends on offerings from
its followers. The monks provide their own food.
13. Local festivals
The mountain behind the monastery is called gTsang chen gzhi gnyan and is the
abode of a local deity of the same name. The deity is propitiated by the monks on
the 15th day of the 1st month.
14. Economic occupation of the local people
Farmers
386



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
Sources
(2) Texts:
- Thar bde dgon gvi lo rgyus, anonymous, MS. 7 folios
- KGLG, Vol.1, pp.634-635
(144) Rab rgyal Monastery
1. Name of the monastery
Rab rgyal
2. Location
The monastery is located on the bank of Yangtze which is the borderline
between TAR and Sichuan Province.
It takes two days on horseback to reach there from the county town of Derge.
3. History
The founder of the monastery was bsTan pa lhun grub from Ri rtse drug in
Khyung po, but the exact date of its foundation remains unknown. Mention is made
of thirteen successive heads of the monastery, but their names remain unclear. The
monastery was wrecked during the Cultural Revolution and was rebuilt by old
monks of the monastery in the 1980s.
5. Current number of monks
There are twenty novices and monks at the monastery.
6. Current education
They have no organized classes, but the young monks are trained by the elder
monks.
8/9. Rituals
There are two important annual rituals: the summer offerings (dbyar mchod)
for fifteen days and the winter offerings (dgun mchod) for seven days. The former is
concernd with rNam par rgyal ba, an aspect of gShen rab Mi bo and the latter, with
the tutelary deity Khro bo.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery has no regular source of income and depends on offerings from
the faithful. The monks provide their own food.
387



14. Occupation of the local people
Farmers and nomads
I was told that there was no one in the monastery when I was just about to go
to Rab rgyal and Thar bde Monasteries from Derge in autumn in 1997. I therefore
could not visit them. This is why I have so little information concerning these
monasteries.
Source
(2) Texts:
- KGLG, Vol.1, pp. 629-630
388



County Seat
District Seat
gSer-shul
Township Seat
Administrative Village
dKar-mdzes
A-phayug
Monastery
Mountain
County Border
Township Border
River
Dzą
y river
chudBon-thog
an are
Road
Nya-gug
Footpathi
Daags-chen
Suede B-khodam
1/1,050,000
sDe-dge County
Terre
"Mhes-Sai
"Khor-lo-mdo
Ehre
Deakhog bar-ma
Ma-ni gad-mgo
Karold
Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
dGon-chen
TAR
o Cang-ra)
-
Rong-
Rong-pa-tsha
Peisad Kar-mdzệs County
mums
3-speak
HD
dPal-yul
389
Nyag-rong
Hor-spo



(135) Khro tshang Monastery
(136) Mon rgyal Monastery Plate 1
390



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal. Gansu and Sichuan
(136) sMon rgyal Monastery. Plate 2 sMon rgyal tha sras (b.1938), the
hereditary lama of Kun grol lineage of the monastery
391



(137) 'Bum rmad Monastery
(138) Shar rdza Hermitage Plate 1
392



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(138) Shar rdza Hermitage, Plate 2 mThu stobs rnam rgyal (the elder), the present rgyaltshab of the
hermitage
(139)
Teng chen Monastery
393



(140) Zer 'phro Monastery
(141) Phen zhol Monastery
394



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
WA
(142) Ri spun Monastery
395



dPal yul county
dPal yul county is located in western Kardze Prefecture. The county comprises
four Qu divided into seventeen xiang and sixty-six villages. Marthang (Mar thang)
town (latitude: 31°12'N, longitude: 98°49'E, altitude: 3,030 m), the capital of the
county is located 622 km west of Dartsemdo (Dar rtse mdo), the capital of the
Kardze Prefecture.
There are four Bonpo, twenty seven rNying ma pa, one bKa'brgyud pa and
three Sa skya pa monasteries in dPal yul county.
(145) Kha rag Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is dPal gShen bstan kha rag g-yung drung bde chen
gling.
2. Location
"Dzin chu river is the longest in dPal yul county. It is a tributary of the 'Bri chu
(Yangtze) river, and its total length is 180.8 km. It flows along a south to north axis,
from the common border of 'Bathang, Li thang and dPal yul, through six districts
(xiang), 'Dam thar, Atshab, mNyam skyid, 'Dzin khog, Rag khyab and Hor spo
till it joins the 'Bri chu river. The river is named after 'Dzin khog, a valley through
which it flows. Kha rag Monastery is located on the north bank of the river, about 90
km northeast of Marthang, the county seat.
3. History
Kha rag is a very ancient place-name in the history of Bon. Bonpo people
believed that it was one of the forty-five gathering places ('du gnas) founded by
Mukhri bТsan po, the second king of the Yar lung kings in Tibet, and gShen Nam
mkha' snang ba mdog can when they invited hundreds of Bonpo masters from Zhang
zhung. Dran pa'i rnam thar g-yung drung gsang mdzod and bKa'brgyad brgyud
also mentioned Kha rag as one of the 'du gnas of Bon founded in the period of King
Mu khri btsan po.
The history of Kha rag can be divided into two parts: its history as a 'du gnas
and later as a dgon pa. As a 'du gnas, it has a long history, and has been regarded as
a sacred site from the outset. There are several legendary versions dealing with Kha
rag, but they all seem too fantastical to relate here.
There was a written history of the 'du gnas entitled Kha rag gnas kyi lo rgyus
by Gling gshen Mu la blo gros, which might have contained valuble information,
and I spent much time looking for it when I visited Khams in the autumn of 1997,
396



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
but unfortunately I was unable to find it.
In accordance with the oral tradition recorded by Bya Tshe ring in a history of
Kha rag, the founder of Kha rag monsatery was Ngo zhu Tshul khrims rgyal mtshan.
His family was originally from Bru sha (Gilgit) and was known as Bru sha rNam
sras spyi ring. During King Khri srong Ide btsan's persecution of Bon in the 8th
century, Bla klu dbang, a Bonpo master belonging to the Bru sha family fled to the
"Dzin valley in Khams and founded a monastery at Nor bu'i dbu rtse in Khrom stod
khams lung east of dDe dge. After five generations, Tshul khrims rgyal mtshan was
born in the Fire-Dog year (986A.D.). His father was Ye shes rgyal mtshan and his
mother, Zhu bza' g Yung drung mtsho. Since his mother was from Zhu, an ancient
and famous family in the history Bon, he was called Ngo zhu Tshul khrims rgyal
mtshan. From that time, the family of Bru in Kha rag was known as Ngo zhu Bru
tshang. In accordance with the wishes of his father Ye shes rgyal mtshan, Ngo zhu
Tshul khrims rgyal mtshan founded a monastery at the holy site of Kha rag, and his
family took the name of Kha rag tshang. The lineage ran for forty-eight generations,
The first twenty-eight descendants were:
1. Ngo zhu Tshul khrims rgyal mtshan
2. Nam mkha' bstan'dzin
3. bkra shis g-yung drung
4. Phun tshogs dbang rgyal
5. Shes rab rgyal mtshan
6. Kun bzang g-yung drung
7. Phun tshogs rgyal mtshan
8. 'Chi med g-yung drung
9. 'Chi med blogsal
10. Rin chen rgyal mtshan
11. bs Tan 'dzin gtsug phud
12. Kun dga' ye shes
13. gYung drung blo gros
14. Shes rab g-yung drung
15. bkra shis rin chen
16. bsKal bzang nor bu
17. gYung drung bstan rgyal
18. Nam mkha'blo gros
19. 'Chi med tshe dbang
20. gYung drung blo gsal
21. Kun bzang bstan'dzin
22. gYung drung bstan'dzin
23. bSod nams bkra shis
24. A rten
397



25. A tshan
26. gSang sngags
27. 'Jam dpal blo gros
28. Kun dga' blo gros
In addition to the twenty-eight masters mentioned above, there was a very
learned master called g Yung drung bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan who belonged to the
eighteenth generation of the Kha rag tshang family. He was born in the Fire-Rat
year of the 9th Rab byung (1516). His father's name was skal bzang nor bu, and
his mother's Ye shes Iha 'dzoms. gYung drung bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan founded a
monastery called Jes ri at the foot of Mount Bon ri in kong po where he introduced
the practice of the observance of the summer fast (dbyar gnas) and the dgu gtor
rite. He also founded a meditation centre (sgrub grwa) in Kharag IHa rgyal rtse
mo where he initiated the ritual tradition of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan. He
wrote more than ten volumes of works, but unfortunately very few of them survived.
Nam mkha' blo gros, the 18th master in the line, was born in the Wood-Dragon year
of the 9th Rab byung (1556). He received teachings from g Yung drung bstan pa'i
rgyal mtshan and built a three-storey assembly hall ('du khang). From his time
onwards, the hereditary succession of the Kha rag tshang has continued unbroken to
this day.
Kha rag 'Jam dbyangs blo gsal rgyal mtshan (b.1939), the last descendant,
took me to monasteries Zla 'od and gTsug'od near Kha rag Monastery when I was
visiting the area in autumn 1997. The system of succession through reincarnation
was never adopted in this monastery and the hereditary line of Kha rag tshang is still
the head of the monastery.
4. Hierarchical system
-dgon bdag, a hereditary line, the present one is Kha rag bla ma.
- dbu mdzad
-dgos skos
- phyag mdzod
- spyi gnyer
All the incumbents are elected by monks and changed every seven years with
the exception of the dgon bdag.
5. Current number of monks
There are fifty novices and monks at the monastery.
6. Curent education
There are no organized classes. The young novices are taught by masters of
their choice.
398



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
7. Educational exchange
The monastery was formerly closely connected with gYas ru dben sa kha'. This
connection is mentioned in the history of the Akhrid system of meditation. Later the
monastery developed close ties with sMan ri, gShen Dar sdings and Me'u tshang
in Central Tibet, and Jes ri Monastery in Kong po. At present the monks go to Shar
rdza Hermitage for further training but there are no regular educational exchanges
between Kha rag and other monasteries.
8/9. Rituals
. Ist month: commemoration of gShen rab Mi bo and mNyam med Shes rab
rgyal mtshan from the 1st day
- 5th month: the ritual cycle of Khro bo rol pa
- 6-7th month: the observance of the summer fast (dbyar gnas) from the 1st day
of the 6th month to the 19th day of the 7th month
- 8th month: the ritual cycle of Margyud
- 9th month: the dgu gtor rite based on the ritual cycle of Phur pa
- 10th month: the ceremony based on the Kun rig gnas tong dbang chen from
the 1st to the 28th day
- 11th month: the dgu gtor rite based on the ritual cycle of sTag la from the 3rd
to the 29th day including two days of cham
- 12th month: another dgu gtor rite of sTag la and the offering of the Ishogs
1000 times to the protectors of Bon (bon skyong)
10. Manuscripts and printed books
The monastery has two printed copies of Kanjur and various other texts.
11. Economic circumstances of the monastery
The monastery depends on donations from its followers.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of one community: Gur (or rGuru) spun
gsum, "the three brothers of rGur", divided into three branches with a total of
thirty-four families around two hundred people). According to oral tradition, these
people are the decsendants of the rur spun gsum tribe mentioned in the Ge sar epic.
14. Local festivals
There is a la btsas at the top of the mountain behind the monastery called Kha
rag sdong brag which is believed to be the residence of the local deity of the same
name. It was reconstructed in 1988 in accordance with the instructions given by Kun
gsal blo gros, the present chief teacher at gYung drung gling Monastery in g Tsang,
399



The deity's propitiation takes place on the 15th day of the 4th month.
Sources
(1) Interview in autumn of 1997: Kha rag 'Jam dpal blogsal rgyal mtshan (b.1939),
the present Kha rag bla ma
(2) Texts:
- "Dzing kha rag dgon gyi lo rgyus by Bya Tshe ring, MS
Notes
1 dPal yul rdzong gi sa cha'i ming btus by dPal yul rdzong gi sa ming las don'go khrid tsho
chung, 1986, P. 84.
2 "Dzing Kha rag dgon gyi lo rgyud by Bya Tshe ring, MS, p.2: dran pa'i rnam thar g-yung
drung gsang mdzod/ bod rgyal Mu khri btsan po la sogs pal Bon gshen rnams kyis bstan
pa spel ba'i yull 'dzing gi kha rag shar phyogs rgyal mo rong/ bka'brgyad brgyud/ rgyal
bo mu-khri btsan-po sogs bon gshen rnams kyis bka brgyad bsgrubs pa'i gnas nil la stod
drung gi tshal phug/ 'dzing gi kha rag gsang phug/ In both passages the name of the area
where Kha rag is located is spelt "Dzing instead of 'Dzin, but in fact both spellings are
still in use.
3 A monastery in rNam gling in g Tsang, Central Tibet, that was destroyed by flood in the
14th century.
(146) Zla 'od Monastery
1. Name of the monastery
In the ancient inscription on the wall inside the assembly hall ('du khang),
which I will discuss below, the name of the monastery appears as rDa dbus dgon pa.
2. Location
The monastery is located about two hours on horseback southeast of Kha rag
Monastery, at the top of a hill and surrounded by a forest. It is about 70 km northeast
of the county town of dPal yul.
3. History
According to oral tradition, Pad ma bdud 'dud, the youngest son of Khod
po sNang Idan, married Chos mtsho and had three sons. The eldest, Nam mkha'i
rgyal po, founded Zla 'od Monastery (No.146), and became known as Zla 'od Nam
mkha'i rgyal po, the second son, Nyi ma'i rgyal po, founded g Tsug 'od Monastery
(No.147) near by, and was subsequently known as gTsug'od Nyi ma'i rgyal po.
The youngest son founded a monastery at sTag mgo gdong, on a hill resembling the
head of a tiger, in a valley called g Yang zla gzhi in the same locality as the other two
400



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
monasteries. The year of the monastery's foundation is believed to be 1124A.D., but
there is no evidence to substantiate this.
Zla 'od Nam mkha'i rgyal po was the prelate of the kings of Khro skyabs
and Brag steng, two of the eighteen kingkdoms of rGyal rong. The history of the
monastery after his time, as well as the chronology of its successive masters remain
unclear:
1. Zla 'od Nam mkha'i rgyal po
2. gYung drung rgyal mtshan
3. bSod nams rgyal mtshan
4. gTshug phud
5. Shes rab bkra shis
6. Nyi ma rgyal mtshan
7. Nam mkha' rgyal mtshan
8. sByin pa 'od zer
9. Nam mkha' hun grub
10, bSlab gsum phun tshogs
11. bSam gtan
12. Gyal ba g-yung drung
13. A don
14. bs Tan 'dzin rnam rgyal
15. Pad ma rgyal mtshan
16. 'Chi med
Since dPal yul district belonged to sDe dge in the past, many of the masters
mentioned above were close to the kings of De dge, and several among them served
as their prelates.
Unfortunately none of their dates seem credible enough to mention here
although I attempted to determine the dates of some of them.
I was excited to find a long script on the ancient wall in the assembly hall
('du khang) which I hoped would yield some important historical information about
the monastery. A monk at the monastery spent much time and energy making a copy
of it for me, but unfortunately its content is disappointing. However, it says that the
assembly hall was built by a bSod nams rgyal po, and not Nam mkha'i rgyal po as
mentioned above, although no dates are provided. Otherwise the entire inscription
is devoted to the praise of the assembly hall and to the description of the statues
within
During the time of g Tsug'od, Zla 'od and gTsug'od monasteries performed
all of their annual rituals together. Despite the damage suffered during the Cultural
Revolution, around 11,534 meters of the original wall-patings within the assembly
hall have been preserved.



4. Hierarchical system
Same as Kha rag Monastery (No.145)
5. Current number of monks
There are nine novices and monks at the monastery.
6. Current education
There are no organizd classes. The young novices are taught by masters of their
choice.
7. Educational exchange
The monastery follows the Bru, Zhu or gShen traditions of ritual practice,
(mainly the Bru tradition). At present the monastery also follows the New Bon
tradition and the monks go to Shar rdza hermitage for teachings and retreats.
8/9. Rituals
- 1st month: Bla ma mchod chog from the 15th to the 20th day
- 4th month: the Klong rgyas cho ga from the 10th to the 15th day
- 5th month: Margyud stong tshogs for seven days
- 8th month: the smyung gnas fasting for eight days
- 10th month: offerings of the sacrificial cake (tshogs) 1000 times from the 10th
to the 15th day
- 11th month: the performance of the Zhi khro ritual from the 10th to the 20th
day and the dgu gtor rite from the 24th to the 29th day
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery possesses one printed copy of the Kanjur, one printed copy of
the collected works of Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan, one printed copy of the
collected works of g Ter ston Tshang drag, the printed edition of the Dran pa bka
thang in eight volumes, that of the Tshe dbang bka'thang in four volumes and that
of the mKha' 'gro bka'thang in one volume.
There are manuscript copies of the following ritual texts: Zhi khro, Ma rgyud,
Khro bo mgo mtshar rgyas pa, gDugs dkar, bDe 'dus, sTag la, Byams ma, gShed
dmar, Gu drag, Khro bo rol pa, Seng gdong ma and Kun rig.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery depends on donations from the local lay community
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of three villages: Ri tshal phu pa with
402



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
twenty-five families, Phyug po phu ba with fifteen families and g Yang stod phu pa
with eighteen families (273 people altogether).
13. Local festivals
The mountain behind the monastery is called gSer phu and is believed to be
the abode of the local deity Bya chen. There is a la brsas dedicated to him on the
summit of the mountain. The deity is propitiated on the 10th day of the 1st month by
the monks.
Another mountain called gZung mgon 1 km east of the monastery is regarded
as the abode of the eponymous local deity. There is a la btsas on its summit. The
date of its renewal ceremony is not fixed. The ceremony is attended by the lay
members of the Bonpo community
There is a sacred mountain (gnas ri) called mDa' IHa ri 20 km south of the
monastery with a la btsas halfway up. It was first "opened" (gnas sgo phyed pa)
as a holy place by bSod nams dbang rgyal alias Zla 'od Nam mkhathog'dzin
and later further sanctified by gTer chen Tshe dbang grags pa and also by Glang
zhig. Its veneration ceremony takes place on the 15th day of the 4th month and the
ceremony is attended by the members of both Bonpo and Buddhist communities. It
is circumambulated following the Bon tradition, (g-yas skor, i.e. counter-clockwise).
14. Occupation of the local population
Farmers and nomads
Sources
(1) Interview in autumn 1997 with 'Jigs med, a monk at the monastery (b.1965)
(2) Texts:
- Zla 'od dgon gyi lo rgyus by Bya Tshe ring, MS
- The inscription on the assembly hall of the monastery
- gisug'od dgon pa, MS., anonymous
Notes
1 Bon is referred to as Bon dkar ("White Bon") and Bon nag ("Black Bon") by the
Buddhists, and as bka gsar ("new teachings") and bka'rnying (old teachings") by the
Bon pos themselves. Because of the negative connotation of "Bon nag", Shar rdza bkra
shis rgyal mtshan does not agree with either appelations; he considers that the distinction
between new and old teachings is also incorrect and refers to them as new and old g Ter
ma ("treasures") instead. As a result, the two traditions are now increasingly referred to as
g Ter gsar and g Ter mying, "new treasures" and "old treasures".
403



(147) gTsug'od Monastery
1. Name
g Tsug'od
2. Location
The monastery is located about one and a half hours on horseback southeast
of Kha rag Monastery (No.145) in a village whose inhabitants form the local lay
community of the monastery.
3. History
According to oral history, Pad ma bdud 'dul, a descendant of the Khyung tribe
and the youngest son of Khod po sNang Idan, married Chos mtsho, and had three
sons. The eldest, Nam mkha'i rgyal po, founded Zla 'od monastery (No.146) and
became known as Zla 'od Nam mkha'i rgyal po, the second son, Nyi ma'i rgyal po,
founded g Tsug'od temple in the Wood-Dragon year of the 2nd Rab byung (1124)
near Zla 'od Monastery, and became known as gTsug'od Nyi ma'i rgyal po.
Nyi ma'i rgyal po married skal bzang Iha mo and had three sons. bs Tan pa lhun
grub, the eldest son and bDe skyid lha mo had two sons. bsTan pa 'od zer, the elder
one and rTa mgrin mtsho, had a son called IHun grub dbang Idan, who became a
renowned master. He and gYung drung dbang mo had four sons. The youngest son
married Na ba tshang Shes rab sgrol ma and had five sons, the middle son became
a gter ston. He discovered many gter ma texts and was initiated into the practice of
rtsa rlung by Nyag gter gSang sngags gling pa. The youngest son, Pad mag-yung
drung, had three sons, the youngest of whom, gYung drung rgyal mtshan, married
Nyi li Bo legs and had two sons. One of the two sons bsTan pa married gZha' tsha
Rig 'dzin lha mo and had two sons. The eldest son dBang phyug married Khra
tshang Guru sgrol ma and had only one son called Phun tshogs who, with Zla 'od
sgrol ma, had three sons; the second son, Rig 'dzin, was a disciple of Shar rdza bkra
shis rgyal mtshan (1858-1934). He married Tag mgo A rang sgrol ma and had a
son called 'Chi med rgyal mtshan who was recognized by 'Jam dbyang mkhyen
brtse and Thar bde Dri med as the reincarnation of Rab brtan shes rab of Cang lung
Monastery (No. 148) in the same county.
In the lifetime of 'Chi med rgyal mtshan, the monastery was looted by Nyi
grags tshang, a Buddhist family in the same area and the Bon religion was banned
until the middle of 20th century. In the 1980s, the monastery was rebuilt at a place
called Rab mgo.
I obtained an eighteen-page manuscript devoted to the history of the monastery
simply entitled gTsug'od dgon. It is anonymous. Its author claims that he saw
a chronology of the monastery entitled bs Tan rtsis nor phreng rab gsal me long,
404



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
beginning in the Earth-Serpent year of the 5th Rab byung (1269) and ending
in 1489. Then new additions were made to bring it up to 1991. The date of the
monastery's foundation mentioned above was taken from the anonymous work
gTsug'od dgon. However, unfortunately, I was unable to find the chronology and I
don't even know whether it is still available.
4. Hierarchical system
-dgon bdag
- dbu mdzad
-dgos skos
- phyag mdzod
- spyi gnyer
All the incumbents are elected by the monks and changed every seven years.
5. Current number of monks
There are only ten monks at the monastery,
6. Current education
There are no organized classes. The young novices are trained by elder monks
of their choice.
7. Educational exchange
The monastery follows the Bru, Zhu or gShen traditions of ritual practice,
(mainly the Bru tradition). At present the monastery also follows the New Bon
tradition (see note 1 of Zla 'od Monastery, No.146) and the monks go to Shar rdza
Hermitage for teachings and retreats.
8/9. Rituals
From gTsug'od Shes rab's time onwards, Zla 'od and g Tsug'od monasteries
performed all their annual rituals together.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery depends on donations from the faithful.
12. Local community
Same as those of Zla 'od Monastery
13. Local festivals
Same as those of Zla 'od monastery
405



14. Occupation of the local population
Farmers and nomads
Sources
(1) Interview in autumn 1997: Kha rag bla ma, the head of the monastery; 'Jigs med
(b.1965), a monk of the monastery
(2) Texts:
- Zla 'od dgon gyi lo rgyus by Bya Tshe ring, MS
- The inscription on the wall in the assembly hall of the monastery
(148) ICang lung Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is gTer Thung Icang lung or Cang lung g Yung drung
mthong grol gling.
2. Location
The monastery is located at the foot of Mount Ka ye rgyal mo facing Dis mgo
village in gTer Ihung (g Ter lung) valley in g Ter Ihung district, which is located 75
km northeast of Palyul, the county seat. It takes around one hour on horseback from
the county town to the monastery.
3. History
According to oral tradition, following a prophecy, Nam mkha' lhun grub, a
master of the Wa zha tribe, left Central Tibet and travelled to the east of mDo khams,
and founded a monastery at mGo ti sgang. His youngest son, gYung drung dbang
Idan, founded the original ICang lung Monastery at a place in g Ter Ihung valley
where he discovered a chest containing a bse ruli ra, "rhinoceros horn", and that, as
a result, became known as bSe ru'i mgo.
Following is a list of the monastery's masters:
1. gYung drung dbang Idan
2. gYung drung Ihun grub
3. gYung drung bstan rgyal
4. Nam mkha' lhun grub,
5. Blo gros g-yung drung
6. bsTan pa dbang rgyal
7. Kun bzang rgyal mtshan
8. mKhas grub rgyal mtshan
9. Rin chen dbang Idan
406



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal. Gansu and Sichuan
10. gYung drung dbang rgyal
11. Nam mkha' bzang po
12. bSod nams dbang rgyal
13. bSod nams bzang po
14. IHun grub tshul khrims
15. mChog dga
16. Yon tan rin chen
17. Rin chen
18. bSod nams g-yung drung
19. Kun bzang rgyal mtshan
20. gYung drung mam rgyal
21. rNam 'joms
22. gYung drung lha mo
23. Ya ma rgyal
24. bs Tan 'dzin
25. mKhas btsun Bon dbyings rdo rje
26. Tshe dbang g-yung drung
27. Rab brtan shes rab
28. bs Tan 'dzin dbang rgyal
29. Rang Ita rin chen
30. Kun bzang rdo rje
This list is taken from a history of the monastery entitled (Cang lung dgon,
MS, unfortunately no dates are given. The oral accounts of many of these masters
that I heard from the local population are also difficult to date. The succession of
the masters before g Yung drung mam rgyal, the 20th in the lineage, was hereditary.
The masters from the 21st to the 24th is unknown. From the time of mKhas btsun
Bon dbyings rdo rje, the 25th master in the lineage, succession by reincarnation was
adopted.
mKhas btsun Bon dbyings rdo rje defeated a master called Bra sras in a debate
and thus won the estime of the royal family of De dge who bestowed lands on him,
and appointed him as a prelate at the court.
The monastery was destroyed during the Cultural Revolution and was rebuilt
by the following monks of the monastery:
mKhan Sangs rgyas tshe brtan, 'Chi med rgyal mtshan, the reincarnation of Rab
brtan shes rab, Bla ma 'od zer, bra shis mgon, Rigdzin rdo rje, and Rang rig,
4. Hierarchical system
dgon bdag
- one dbu mdzad
- one dge skos



- three spyi ba (gnyer ba)
- two mchod dpon
All the incumbents are replaced every three years.
5. Current number of monks
There are thirty novices and monks altogether.
6. Current education
There are no organized classes. The young novices are trained by the elder
monks.
7. Educational exchange
Traditionally, the monastery had very close ties with sMan ri in gTsang, but is
now closer to Shar rdza Hermitage in sDe dge.
8/9. Rituals
Kun rig (ten days), dbyar mchod (twenty-one days), Phur pa (ten days), Me
tog mchod pa (seven days), sgrib sbyang (five days), smyung gnas (eighteen days),
dbyar gnas (fifty-three days), dgu gtor (seven days), Margyud (five days).
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has copies of both the Bonpo and Buddhist Kanjur and Tenjur
as well as the collected works of the following masters: Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal
mtshan, Kun grol 'Ja' tshon snying po, Klong chen rab 'byams, and 'Jigs med gling
pa.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery depends on offerings. The monks provide their own food.
12. Local community
The local lay community of the monastery consists of three villages: g Yu
mgo with twenty families, Chu phyar with twenty families, and Til mgo with thirty
families. In other villages there is sDong thog with thirty-four families and sBas
gong with seventeen families who were converted to the rNying ma pa tradition.
In these villages, the Bonpo practitioners perform the ritual called gsol kha for the
families, but for funerary rites the people call upon the monks of the rNying ma pa
monastery
13. Local festivals
Mount Ka ye rgyal mo, situated behind the monastery is believed to be a holy
408



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
mountain blessed by the goddess Byams ma. It was opened" (gnas ngo phyed pa)
by 'Jam dbyangs mkhyen brtse dbang po and Kong sprul Yon tan rgya mtsho. Its
circumambulation in the Bonpo way) by the local people takes place on the 15th
day of the 4th month.
14. Occupation of the local population
Farming supplemented by animal husbandry
Sources
(1) Interviews in autumn of 1997 with the following monks at the monastery:
Ye shes Tshe ring (b.1949), bSod nams chos 'phel (b.1923) and dKon mchog
(b.1933)
409



410
dKar-mdzes County
Cang-long
sDe-dge County
SPrel-mda' River
gler-Thung
"Din-khog
River
Kharag
Tsug- od
"Dzin-chu
Hor-spo
điya
việc
Pin-cho
Zam-chu
County
dpal - yul)
County Seat
River
District Seat
•
Township Seat
Monastery
8 Mar-thang
i
County Border
Township Border
River
Road
Footpath
1/470,000
Rong-gebs



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
(145) Kha rag Monastery, Plate 1



(145) Kha rag Monastery, Plate 2 Kha rag 'Jam dbyangs blo gros rgyal
mtshan (b.1939), the present Kha rag bla ma
412



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(146) Zla 'od Monastery
(147) gTsug od Monastery
413



(148) Cang lung Monastery
414



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
dKar mdzes County
dkar mdzes County is located in northwestern dar mdzes Tibetan
Autonomous Prefecture, Sichuan Province, around the upper reaches of the rDza chu
river. dar mdzes is the capital of Kar mdzes county (latitude: 31°37'N, longitude:
99°59'E). The county covers an area of 6,364 sq km and comprises 26 townships.
The total population is 51,781 (49,042 of whom are Tibetans).
(149) Gong lung Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is Gong lung gYung drung mi 'gyur gling. Since it is
the only Bonpo monastery in this county, it is known as Bonpo monastery or Bonpo
gYung drung
2. Location
The monastery is located 22 km west of dar mdzes, the county seat.
3. History
According to oral tradition, the original site of the monastery was near a place
called Rab gsal zhabs facing the monastery. No one knows the exact date of its
foundation, but it is said to have been founded during the royal period (7th-8th
centuries). The monastery was later moved to a place called Dar lung. The farmers
who cultivate the land on both former sites have come across the ruins of the
monastery.
In the 18th century, Kun grol 'Ja' tshon snying po (b.1700) moved the
monastery to its present site with the financial support of the sMon rgyal family and
spent the first half of his life at the monastery. His knowledge and fame attracted
many disciples, followed by their families who settled around the monastery,
forming what later became known as Chos 'khor village. The last master of the
monastery still remembered by the local people was A khu Prul sku (1876-1943).
He was a member of the sMon rgyal family and a disciple of Shar rdza bkra shis
rgyal mtshan. The monastery was partially wrecked during the Cultural Revolution.
However, the original assembly hall (du khang) has survived except for the statues
and books inside. The monastery was reopened in the 1980s.
4. Hierarchical system
The head of the monastery's administrative committee is 'Phrin las lhun grub.
None of the traditional positions exist.
415



5. Current number of monks
There are all together eighteen novices and monks, only six of whom live in the
monastery.
6. Current education
There are no organized classes. The young novices are trained by the elder
monks.
7. Educational exchange
A khu sPrul sku developed close ties with Shar rdza Hermitage and thus the
monks go there for teachings and the three-year retreat.
8/9. Rituals
Following is the ritual tradition established by Kun grol 'Ja' tshon snying po:
- 1st month: gNas brtan bcu drug on the 2nd day, the Zhi khro cycle on the 3rd
and 4th days, commemoration (dgong rdzogs) of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal
mtshan on the 5th day, the A dkar bum sgrub from the 6th to the 8th day and
the rТsa gsum cho ga from the 9th to the 15th day
- 4th month: the Zhi khro cycle from the Sth to the 7th day and the Si tu'i bum
sgrub from the 8th to the 15th day
- 12th month: the ritual cycle of sTag la and Srid rgyal from the 15th to the 29th
day with the dgu gtor rite on the 29th day
10. Books held at the monastery
The monastery possesses only the usual texts for liturgical purposes.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery has no regular source of income and relies on offerings from the
faithful. The monks provide their own food.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of only three Bonpo families and seven partly
Bonpo and partly Buddhist families (i.e. who call upon the Bonpo monks to perform
rituals relating to wordly matters and upon the Buddhist monks to perform those
dealing with the here-after) in Chos 'khor village.
13. Local festivals
The mountain behind the monastery, dGe bsnyen Mi ra, is the abode of
the deity of the same name. The la btsas is on the mountainside and its renewal
ceremony takes place on the 15th day of the 5th month, although the custom is now
416



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
hardly followed.
14. Economic occupation of the local population
Farmers
Sources
(1) Interview in autumn 1997 with dBang dga' bSod nams dbang rgyal (b.1929)
(2) Texts:
- Bon po dgon gyi lo rgyus, in Khams phyogs dkar idzes khul gyi dgon sde
so so 'i lo rgyus gsal bar bshad pa nang bstan gsal ba'i me long, compiled
by Krung go'i bod kyi shes rig zhib 'jug Ite gnas kyi chos lugs lo rgyus zhib
'jug so'o et al, China Tibetology Publishing House, Beijing, 1999. Vol. 1, pp.
206-210
-dKar mdzes rdzong gi sa cha'i ming btus published by dar mdzes rdzong gi
sa ming las don 'go khrid tsho tshung, dar mdzes, 1986



418
County Seat
District Seat
gSer-rta County
Township Seat
Monastery
County Border
Township Border
Road
Footpath
sDe-dge County
rDra-khop
1/670,000
mdzes
County
Brag-'go County
Rong-tsha
Bye-sser
Dan-ma
Gong-luk en dreng sling
Rong-pa-tsha
Bi-nga m ando dKar-mdzes
dkar raps Lho-pa
dGu-gtaps
atre-hor
ger-mkhar
Thang khu
|
A
dPal-yul County
Sa-stod
Nyag-rong County
River



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
(149) Gong lung Monastery
419



Nyag rong rdzong
Nyag rong (Chinese Xinlong Xian) is a county of dar mdzes Tibetan
Autonomous Prefecture in Sichuan province. The seat of Nyag rong county is Ri
nang, located at Ri nang pasture in Nyag rong valley. There are ninety-two villages
divided between twenty-four townships. The total area of the county is 8,672 sq
km. The population is 38,371 (31,388 of whom were Tibetans in 1986). The highest
mountain in the county is Kha ba lung ri in Zur pa at an altitude of 5,995 m (its
peaks remain snow-capped throughout the year). Nyag chu river flows southward
through a deep gorge across the county for 175 km. 10.1% of the county area is
covered by forest.' There are eight Bonpo monasteries in the county?
(150) Ye shes Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is Shad sgrub bstan rgyas bkra shis g-yung drung
gling; it was also known as Ye shes spos mdud dgon or Ye shes bshad sgrub gling.
2. Location
The monastery is located on the south bank of a stream in Gong shod valley, 5
km east of Ri snang, the seat of Nyag rong county. Gong shod valley is one of the
"eighteen large valleys" (Shod chen bco brgyad) of Nyag rong county. The site of
the monastery is called Brag dmar mdo rtsa (literally "foot of the red rock”), because
it is located at the foot of a red rock (Brag dmar)
3. History
According to oral tradition, during the persecution of Bon under the reign of
King Khri srong Ide btsan, many Bonpo masters fled from central Tibet, and thus a
master called sTag gsas came to Me nyag, and became known as Me nyag sTag gsas.
The Bonpo scholar and historian Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan (1858-1934) also
mentions this personage in his historical work. It is also said that Me nyag sTag gsas
and rMa Ha rgod of Nyag rong are in fact one and the same. There is a prayer text
entitled Lo rgyus gsol 'debs (MS) in Ye shes Monastery mentioning that the great
and powerful hero Me nyag sTag gsas came to Me nyag under the name of rMa gsas
IHa rgod".
The son of rMa Ha rgod was called Nam mkha' ye shes. He received teachings
from his father and then travelled extensively to propagate the Bon religion. He won
the esteem and support of Klu rgyal, the chief of Nyag rong who helped him build
a monastery at Brag dmar mdo rtsa in his honour. The monastery was named Ye
shes Monastery after him. Since the monastery consisted of temples (tha khang), the
420



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
b
place became known as I Ha khang thang, the "plain of temples".
Three generations of Nyag rong chiefs acted as patrons of Nam mkha' ye shes:
Klurgyal, his son Klu mgon and his grandson Klu skyabs. Nam mkha' ye shes was
succeeded by Cang mkhar spo sByin pa rgyal mtshan who spent the first half of his
life in Ye shes Monastery, and then left the monastery to live in a hermitage which he
founded on a hill called Darri, which is why he is also locally known as Dari Byin
pa rgyal mtshan. Although Rig 'dzin nyi ma does give precise dates in his historical
work with regard to the masters mentioned above, I am not sure they are accurate
and prefer not to use them here.?
Because Klu thar had no male heirs, the lineage of local chiefs was dis-
continued.
There was also a master called Togs Idan bkra shis rgyal mtshan who became a
famous ascetic in the area; he is also known as Nub rTogs Idan bkra shis rgyal mtshan.
His brother, Mo the Tshul khrims rgyal mtshan, was a lay tantric practictioner and
founded skya thu li temple at La rked stod and gShel lo temple at La rked smad in
Nyag rong; because he was very active in La sked, he was also known as Nyag sked
tshang, and it is said that his lineage continued to be active in the area for seventeen
generations.
During the time of mGon po mam rgyal, a chief of Nyag rong, gSang mchog, a
descendent of Khod spungs sGrub gshen snang Idan, Zla ba grags pa, a descendent
of Mo the lineage, gYung drung rgyal mtshan, a son of 'Od zer gling pa, and Nyag
stod sTong Idan mgon po, agreed to rebuild Ye shes Monastery in which three small
monasteries were merged as one monastery
Later Nyag stod sTong Idan mgon po acted as a patron of the monastery and
renamed it Ye shes bshad sgrub gling. According to Rig 'dzin nyi ma this took place
in 1848.' In 1908, Shar rdza bra shis rgyal mtshan visited the monastery. In 1909,
Khyung po Nyi ma rgyal mtshan and Tshul khrims mchog rgyal added an assembly
hall ('du khang) with twelve columns. Both were disciples of Shar rdza bra shis
rgyal mtshan. Nyi ma rgyal mtshan had two sons, gYung drung bdud 'dul and Ri
kho alias Thugs rje gling pa. The former succeeded him after his death. The latter
discovered numerous gter ma texts in several places in Khams and taught them
throughout the area.
During the Cultural Revolution the monastery was destroyed, but its
reconstruction was undertaken in 1983 with the help of A yung, alias g Yung
drung bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan (1922-1996). In his youth, he was recognized
as the reincarnation of a master called Dri med od zer, and the abbot of the
monastery, Tshul khrims mchog rgyal, kept him in the monastery. In fact the abbot
was a brother of his grandfather. He studied under the abbot, g Ter ston Tshe dbang
gyur med, dBra ston bskal bzang bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan (1897-1959) and Gyal
tshab Blo gros rgyal mtsho.



Later A yung became vice-president of the Political Consultative Conference
of dKar mdzes Prefecture, and it was in this capacity he was able to help to rebuild
Ye shes Monastery and other local Bonpo monasteries. He worked hard to promote
education in Bonpo monasteries in dKar mdzes Prefecture. When I visited dKar
mdzes Prefecture in 1997, I saw his photograph in almost every monastery. I then
realized how popular he was among the Bonpo community.
In the 1980s, a manuscript copy the Bonpo Kanjur was brought out at dBal
khyung Monastery. It was hidden away during the turbulent history. As it turned out,
it was the only complete extant copy of the Bonpo Canon. Its publication, owing to
the strenuous efforts of A yung and his friend Shug sdong skal bzang phun tshogs,
represents a major contribution to Tibetan cultural heritage, although the published
version is not an exact replica of the dBal khyung manuscript. Alongside A yung,
another important figure of the monastery was the master gYung drung bdud 'dul
(?-1995).
In 1983, the authorities granted the monastery permission to reopen. Thanks to
A yung and g Yung drung bdud 'dul, and the financial support and labour provided
by the local lay community, the monastery was rebuilt and is now one of the most
important centres in the region. A rgyal or skal bzang rgya mtsho, a brother of A
yung and "Khrin las kun khyab, the son of g Yung drung bdud 'dul, are the present
leaders of the monastery.
4. Herarchical system
- two gser khri, "gold throne"
- one mkhan po
- one g-yung drung slob dpon
- two dbu
mdzad
- four dge skos
- two mchod dpon
- four shog dpon'!
All the incumbents are reappointed every three years with the exception of the
gser khri whose position is permanent.
5. Current number of monks
There are one hundred and sixty monks and novices in the monastery.
6. Education
The monk students receive a traditional education, both through private tutoring
and collective lessons organized by the monastery.
422



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
7. Educational exchange
The novices go to gYung drung gling in g Tsang and Shar rdza ri khrod in rDza
khog to take their ordination and for further religious training, and also to Nang
zhig for further studies.
8/9. Rituals
- Ist month: commemoration of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan
(1356-1415) for seven days;
- 3rd month: ritual of gCod pa during the entire month
- 5th month: commemoration of Bonpo masters taking the Klong rgyas text as
the basis of the celebration from the 15th to the 20th day; the performance of
the ritual cycle of Kun bzang rgyal ba 'dus pa from the 21st to the 30th day
- 6th month: ritual based on the Rig 'dzin 'dus pa from the 1st to the 11th
day. On the 12th day fifteen kinds of cham dance take place for the public
audience. The 'cham includes such as the sa 'dul, sixteen 'dod yon lha mo,
keng rus, shwa ba; the observance of the summer-fast (dbyar gnas) for fifty
days starting on the 15th day
- 9th month: rituals based on the cycles of sTag a and Phur pa from the 18th to
the 24th day
- 11th month: rituals based on the cycles of Khro bo, Phur pa and Zhang chung
Me ri from the 23rd to the 29th day ending with cham dance on the 29th
10. Books held in the monastery
There are copies of the printed editions of the following books: two copies of
Bonpo Kanjur published by A yung in 197 volumes, one copy of Shar rdza Kra shis
rgyal mtshan's collected works, one copy of mNyam med Shes rab Gyal mtshan's
collected works, one copy of bDe chen gling pa Tshe dbang grags pa's collected
works, one copy of dBra ston bskal bzang bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan's collected works
and one copy of gSang sngags gling pa's gter ma texts.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery has neither land nor animals. The monks are provided for by
their families and the monastery depends financially on donations from the faithful.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of five shog kha (communal division): Ri
nub, La rked, mChog dge, Gong shod and ske bzhi. 1. Ri nub comprises three
villages: Gyang ra with thirty families, Bar shod with twenty-five families and I Ha
khang mdo with thirty-five families. 2. La rked comprises nine villages: dBus ru
with ten families, Bar shod with twenty families, Mirgud with thirteen families,



La ri with eleven families, Lu gu with six families, Tis bru with seven families, Pa
bzi with five families, Phur pa with twelve families and Ye shes with six families.
3. mChog dge comprises three villages: Yar grong with twenty families, Mar grong
with twenty families and Ka re with three families. 4. Gong shod comprises five
villages: Dung ri with six famileis, Yang grong with twelve familes, Mar grong with
seventeen families, sBying ge with nine families and Dar ni with six families. 5. ske
bzhi comprises five villages: sBus thang with twelve families, Darri with thirteen
families, Ja lung with eight families, Ragni with eleven families and Klu khang with
fifteen families.
13. Local festivals
There is a mountain called Kyobs 'byin seng nag surrounded by twelve peaks
about 25 km south of the county town of Nyag rong rdzong. The local deity (yul
Iha), believed to be residing on it, is propitiated by the local people of the villages
mentioned above, but the date of the propitiation is not fixed. It may fall any time
between the beginning of the 5th month to the beginning of the 8th month.
There is also a "sacred mountain" (gnas ri) called Brag dkar Ihang Ihang nor
bu yang rtse located about 40 km west of Nyag rong rdzong county town. It was a
"site of hidden treasures" (gter gnas) where Sangs rgyas gling pa discovered many
concealed texts (gter ma) and consequently he converted the site what is known
as "to open doors of the site" (gnas sgo phyed pa) i.e. revealed the site as a sacred
place. The date of its veneration is not fixed and may fall any time between the
beginning of the 5th month to the beginning of the 8th month of every Dragon Year.
In the past, both Bonpo and Buddhist people circumambulated the mountain in the
Bonpo way, that is, keeping the mountain on the left as one follows the path of the
circuit, but after Nyag bla Pad ma bdud 'dul, a Nying ma pa master, said that both
ways were appropriate and had the same religious efficacy, Buddhists began to
circumambulate the mountain in the clockwise direction.
14. Occupation of the local population
Both nomads and farmers
Sources
(1) Interviews: A rgyal or skal bzang rgya mtsho, a monk and one of the two
masters of the monastery, born in 1939. Rig 'dzin nyi ma, born in 1967, he was
recognized as a reincarnation of a Sa skya monastery, but he did not want to be
converted to the Sa skya pa tradition and has kept his Bonpo faith while living
as a Sa skya pa reincarnation in Ye shes Monastery. gYung drung bstan 'phel
(b.1931) is the abbot of the monastery.



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
Notes
1 Nyag rong rdtong gi sa cha 'l ming btus by Nyag rong rdzong gi sa ming las dong 'go
khrid tsho chung, 1986.
2 KGLG, volume 1. This text mentions nine Bonpo monasteries, the ninth being dBra
khyung sgrub sde gling, pp.385-387.
3 dBal Ha khri, Me nyag sTag gsas, Khyung po Ne khrom, and several others who went to
the North and lived there (1 76a), cf. Samten G. Karmay, The Treasury of Good Sayings: A
Tibetan History of Bon, London, Oxford University Press, 1972, p.93.
4 mthu che dpa'bo, me nyag stag gsas mchog/ rma gsas lha rgod mtshan gsol me nyag
byon.
5 Ye shes dgon pa'i lo rgyus by A g-yung, based on a history of the monastery by gYung
drung bdud 'dul, MS.
6 Historically, Nyag rong is considered a part of Me nyag: the different dialects of Me nyag
are referred to as Me nyag log skad. According to A g-yung, Cang mkhar spo is the Me
nyag log skad term for "Bonpo".
Ye shes dgon pa'i lo rgvus, p.4, MS.
7 Ye shes dgon pa'i lo rgvus kun gsal me long by Rig 'dzin nyi ma, MS.
8 Mo means "rain" and the means "to bring down in the Me nyag log skad, referring to his
ability to provoke rain when needed for the crops, Ye shes dgon pa'l lorgvus, p.8, MS.
9 Ye shes dgon pa 'i lo rgvus kun gsal me long by Rigdzin nyi ma, p.10, MS.
10 dBra ston bskal bzang bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan was Shar rdza bra shis rgyal mtshan's
disciple and the author of his master's biography: the Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan
gyi rnam thar.
Il shog kha means "tribe", and dpon means "chief"; shog dpon is the title given to the monk
in charge of monks belonging to a same tribe within a monastery. Because four of the
local tribes are still Bonpo and belong to Ye shes Monastery, all four have monks in the
monastery, and there is a Shog dpon for each of these groups. Ri nub is also Bonpo and
belongs to the monastery, but since it has no monks in the monastery there is no need for a
Ri nub Shog dpon. The Shog dpon has to be from the same tribe as the group of monks in
his charge and he must also be a former dge bskos.
(151) Gyal zhing Monastery
1. Name
Gyal zhing Monastery was also formerly known as Gyal ba bkra shis or Gyal
zhing 'brug grags
2. Location
Gyal zhing Monastery is about 12 km north of Ri snang, the seat of Nyag rong
county,
425



3. History
According to oral tradition, the master rGyal ba rtsa mkhyen pa founded a
hermitage called Gyal zhing in the valley behind the present monastery. Then it
was moved to another site but the reason and precise time of this change remain
unknown. According to one short account of the monastery's history (rGyal zhing
dgon gyi lo rgyus, 8 folios, MS and anonymous), it was founded by the master
Bya btang Nam mkha'rgyal mtshan in the 10th Rab byung (1567-1626), and later,
because there was no source of drinking water in the vicinity, Khyung 'khor sMon
lam tshul khrims, the master at that time, moved the monastery to a new place. The
new monastery had nine columns and was named Gyal ba bkra shis. The same
account mentions three other masters of this lineage, Sod nams rnam rgyal, Kun
bzang rnam rgyal and 'Chi med, but their dates and life stories are not mentioned.
In the 19th century, Bya btang Dri med od zer offered the monastery a piece of
land known as Zhing stong thang on which the present monastery was built. While
the monastery was being built, the people heard a dragon in the sky and thus the
monastery was named Gyal zhing 'brug grags. It was consecrated by Shar rdza
bra shis rgyal mtshan in the early 20th century. It was partially destroyed during
the Cultural Revolution and rebuilt in the nineteen-eighties. The old assembly hall
still stands and contains some 177 sq m of original murals.
4. Hierarchical system
- one gdung 'dzin
- two dbu mdzad ordbu skyor
- three dge skos
- two mchod dpon
- two spyi ba
The dge bskos are replaced each year, while the dbu mdzad, mchod dpon and
spyi ba are reappointed every two years.
5. Current number of monks
There are twenty-five monks and novices in the monastery.
6. Current education
There are no regular classes and the young novices are taught by the elder
monks.
7. Educational exchange
The monastery was a branch of Gong rgyal Monastery. The monks are
generally sent to Shar rdza Hermitage to take their ordinations, and occasionally to
sNang zhig Monastery (No.180) in Nga khog.
426



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
8/9. Rituals
- 5th month, the observance of the smyung gnas fasting
- 6th month, the performance of ritual based on the Zhi khro sgrub chen from
the 3rd to the 10th day ending with with 'cham dance for the public. The
observance of the dbyar gnas summer-fasting starting from the 15th of the 6th
month for forty-nine days.
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has one copy of the printed edition of Bonpo Kanjur gyur,
published by A yung and skal bzang phun tshogs: one copy of the printed edition of
Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan's collected works; of the 'Bum nyi ma dgu shar in
ten volumes; The yum texts (Buddhist) in twelve volumes.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery has fifteen 'bri (female yak) that were offered by the tha sde
(the monastery's local lay community). The yaks are tended as shi med by several
local families who give 2.5 kg of butter to the monastery per yak each year.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of three shog kha (communal divisions): 1. Zi
re shog-kha with one village (also known as Zi re) comprising twelve families; 2. Sa
nag shod shog kha with five villages: Ba re with four families, Sa nag shod village
with three families, Gong thog village with four families, rGyal zhing with three
families and Ba re sgo village with two families. 3. Sa nag stod shog kha comprising
one village (also called Sa nag stod) with twenty-one families
13. Local festivals
On top of the mountain behind the monastery a la btsas is built according to
the instructions given by gSang sngags gling pa and it is dedicated to the local deity
called bra shis dpal bzang. Its annual renewal ceremony takes place on the 15th
day of the 1st month. There is another la btsas on top of the mountain facing the
monastery. It is dedicated to the local deity gYung drung dar rtse. The la btsas was
constructed according to the instructions given by Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan
and the deity is propitiated by the local people on the 15th day of the 1st month and
on the 13th day of the 12th month.
There is also a sacred mountain (gnas ri) called sBas gnas g-yung drung
sprungs rdzong located 1 km east of the monastery. The master who "opened the
door" (gnas sgo phyed pa) of the mountain was rGyal barTsa mkhyen pa. It is
circumambulated in the Hare-Year during the summer by the people both Bonpo and
Buddhist in the Bonpo way, that is, keeping the mountain on the left as one walks.
427



14. Occupation of the local people
Farmers
Sources
(1) Interviews: Ye bzang (Ye shes bzang po, b. 1964), a monk at the monastery; Do
li (rDo rje rgyal mtshan, b.1947), a monk at the monastery
(152) Gong rgyal Monastery
otel
1. Name
The original spelling of the monastery's name was Gu rgyal. It was later spelt
Gong rgyal by Sangs rgyas gling pa (1705-1735).
2. Location
It is located about 6 km northeast of Ri snang, the seat of Nyag rong county.
3. History
Nam mkha'rgyal mtshan, the first master of the Bya btang lineage, is said
to have built a small monastery at a site called Dar lo, but it is now in ruins. No
one knows when it was built or why it was abandoned. In the 13th Rab byung
(1747-1806), another small monastery was built by gSang sngags gling pa. He
also "opened the door" (gnas sgo phyed pa) of the hidden local mountain (i.e.
transformed the place into sacred site) and called it sBas yul g-yung drungspungs
tshal. He is believed to have discovered a number of holy objects on the sacred site
including a statue of White Tara and a gold gshang bell. He donated these objects
to Gong rgyal Monastery. Around that time the monastery had about one hundred
monks. In the Wood-Bird Year of the 15th Rab byung (1885), Bya btang bsTan pa'i
nyi ma undertook to build a new temple for the monastery following a plan made by
gSang sngags gling pa. When it was completed two years later, gSang sngags gling
pa was invited to consecrate it and to give the lung initiation of the Bonpo Kanjur.
Later, other masters such as Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan, Khro sprul g Yung
drung mthong grol and the fifth Kun grol bDud 'dul gling pa also gave teachings at
the monastery
The Gong rgyal dgon gyi lo rgyus (anonymous, MS) lists twenty-two
successive masters of the Bya btang lineage until the middle of the 20th century:
1) Nam mkha' rgyal mtshan
2) Nam mkha' dbang Idan
3) Ye shes rgyal mtshan
4) g Yung drung gsas pa
428



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
5) bkra shis rgyal mtshan
6) Da dbon Nam mkha' thog sdug
7) Da dbon Nam mkha'rgyal mtshan
8) Grags pa ye shes
9) Tshe dbang bkra shis
10) Shes rab bstan'dzin
11) bSod nams blo gros
12) Sod nams 'od zer
13) sDa dbon Rin chen bloldan
14) Zha bo zhabs ma Nyi ma grags pa
15) Da dbon sMon lam tshul khrims
16) bs Tan 'dzin dbang grags
17) g Yung drung rgyal mtshan
18) Tshul khrims rgyal mtshan
19) g Yung drung bstan pa'i nyi ma
20) Dri med od zer
21) Tshe dbang 'gyur med
22) gShen bstan rgyal mtshan
With Bya btang bs Tan 'dzin dbang grags's two sons, the lineage divided into
two branches. There are two versions of the history about when reincarnation was
adopted for the succession of the Bya btang masters. According to one, the position
continued to be hereditary (gdung brgyud) until Tshe dbang 'gyur med's time in
the middle of the 20th century, after which it was transmitted by reincarnation
However, when I visited the monastery in 1997, I was told that the reincarnation
system was adopted after Bya btang gYung drung rgyal mtshan's time. So far,
because of the lack of reliable sources it has been impossible to verify either
versions of the story, Bya btang Tshe dbang 'gyur med also founded a tantric college
specializing in the practice of the Phurpa cycle.
In the nineteen-eighties, Blo li Trulku built a new assembly hall, as well as
restoring the old assembly hall which was destroyed during the Cultural revolution.
5. Current number of monks
There are fifty-one monks and novices in the monastery.
6. Current education
There are no organized or regular classes. The young monks are taught by the
elder monks.
7. Educational exchange
In the past, Gyal zhing and gZhi ring monasteries were branches of Gong rgyal
429



Monastery, but there des not seem to be any interaction between them at present.
The monks are sent to sMan ri in gTsang, Shar rdza Hermitage (No. 138) and
sTeng chen Monastery (No.139) to take their ordination and receive further training,
8/9. Rituals
- 4th month: observation of fasting (smyung gnas) for 8 days
- 6th month: ritual based on the bSam Thun sgrub chen by Tshe dbang
'gyur med starting on the 4th day for 7 days; observation of the dbyar gnas
ceremony from the 15th day for 45 days
- 9th month: ritual based on the sKu gsum phur sgrub for 7 days
- 11th month: ritual of the cycle of dBal gsas from the 23rd to the 30th day
10. Books held in the monastery
There a copy of the Kanjur published by A yung and skal bzang phun tshogs
in Chengdu 1985-1987. A copy of the Khri skyabs edition of Khams chen in sixteen
volumes, and a MS copy of 'Bum nyi ma dgu shar. There are also some old printing
blocks for the following texts: Dran pa bka'thang, Tshe dhang bka thang, Zhang
zhung snyan brgyud, rNam rgyal gzungs chen, Gu drag, sku gsum phur sgrub, Rig
'dus, gSang 'dus zhi khro, sku gsum thugs thig, bSam thun sgrub skor and gZungs
jug
11. Income and expenses
The monastery has neither land nor animals and depends entirely on donations
from the faithful.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of ten villages: Chu nang with fourteen
families, Dar lo with fifteen families, dGung ru with fourteen families, Gu dar thog
with fourteen families, rTa sa with nine families, rGyal ba with eleven families.
Ying mad with eighteen families, Kha lung with nine families, Nya zi with fourteen
families and Rlung pa with seven families.
13. Local festivals
The mountain behind the monastery is called Ga' bde dpal ri, and is the abode
of a local deity known by the same name. There is a la btsas on top of the mountain
dedicated to the deity. Its renewal ceremony is performed by both the local people
and the monks of the monastery on the 1st day of the 12th month.
At Nyag shod, which is 1.5 km southeast of the monastery, there is a sacred
mountain (gnas ri) called g Yung drung rin chen 'bar ba. It is venerated on the
Ist day of the 5th month, each Dragon-Year by both Bonpo and Buddhists. They
430



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
circumambulate the mountain in the traditional Bonpo way (i.e. keeping the
mountain on the left).
Since the mountain has three peaks, it is also known as Tshogs brgya spun
gsum and was considered as the abode of three local deities related as brothers
before the mountain was transformed into a sacred site.
14. Occupation of the local population
Mainly farmers but one third of the population are nomads
Sources
(1) Interview: gYung drung ram dag, a monk at the monastery, born in 1937
(2) Texts:
- Note: (1) Gong rgyal dgon gyi lo ryus, anonymous, MS
(153) Klo 'bum Monastery
1. Name of the monastery
In the past the monastery was known as Su tshang or Klu 'bum mtha'rten
gling.
2. Location
The monastery is located at a roadside of the main road leading to sGre bo this
smad village, 28 km south of Ri snang. the seat of Nyag rong county.
3. History
According to oral tradition, Su tshang Nam mkha'rgyal mtshan (the Klu
'bum dgon gyi lo rgyus, a MS has Nam mkha'rgya mtsho), the first master of the
Su la lineage, founded a small monastery at Ka smad mgo called Su tshang about
10 km east of the present monastery. He is said to have been the spiritual master of
'Bru da' bde chos skyong ber nag, one of the Thirty Heroes in the Ge sar epic. In
Khams, the hero is considered as a historical figure. Nam mkha'rgyal mtshan was
succeeded by his son Nam mkha''od zer, who in turn was succeeded by his son
Nam mkha' bstan'dzin, who in turn was succeeded by his son Nam mkha' tshul
khrims. Since there was no water source in the vicinity, Nam mkha' tshul khrims
undertook to channel water to the monastery, but the inhabitants of Gre bo village
were unwilling to help. As a result the village split into two villages: Gre bo stod
and Gre bo smad. Moreover, eight monks from Gre bo stod left the monastery and
founded a small monastery called Su tshang stod pa.
Later ICags mdud Shes rab rgyal mtshan, a master of the rNying ma pa
431



monastery and located on the opposite bank of the rDza chu river, converted Su
tshang stod pa to the rNying ma pa tradition and renamed it Nga mga Monastery.
According to KGLG (volume 1, p.302), 1Cags mdud Shes rab rgyal mtshan only
restored the monastery in 1491.
Su tshang Nam mkha' tshul khrims and the people of sGre bo smad pa village
founded Klu 'bum Monastery. As they were preparing the site for construction, they
discovered a Bonpo text entitled Klu 'bum, and thus the monastery was named Klu
"bum. Later Khod spungs Kun bzang od gsal, the twenty-third master in the Su la
lineage, enlarged the assembly hall.
The monastery mainly practised rituals according to the old gter ma (gter
rnying) tradition, especially the ritual cycles of dBal gsas, Ge khod and sTag la, but
after receiving the teachings based on the Rang gter sku gsum phur sgrub by gSang
sngags gling pa the monastery also began to practise the new gter ma tradition (gter
gsar).
Khod spung mDo rgyud grags pa also lived and taught at the monastery for
about five years. In 1923, gYung drung bstan'dzin, the 24th master in the Khod
spung lineage, enlarged the monastery by building a new assembly ball with eight
tall columns. The masters of the Khod spungs lineage, also known as Su la tshang,
have been in charge of the monastery. It is not clear how many masters the lineage
comprises but there are several names that frequently recur in both written and oral
traditions. Su la skal bzang bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan (1897-1959), who belonged
to this lineage, wrote an extensive biography of Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan.
The present master of Su la is bsKal bzang grags pa. Unfortunately I did not meet
him when I visited the monastery in autumn 1997, because he was ill and was
hospitalized in Chengdu at the time. I went with sMon rgyal Iha sras to visit him in
Chengdu, hoping to obtain more information about the monastery, but he was too ill
to receive me.
4. Hierarchical system
- head of the monastery
- two dbu mdzad
- four dge skos
- two mchod dpon
- two spyi ha
All the incumbents are reappointed every three years on a rotational basis.
5. Current number of monks
There are thirty novices and two monks.
432



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
6. Current education
The younger novices are taught by the elder monks.
7. Educational exchange
La kha Monastery (No. 154) is a branch of Klu 'bum. So there are exchanges
between the two monasteries (see below). The monks go to Shar rdza Hermitage
(No.138) to take their ordination.
8/9. Rituals
The monks go to dBra khyung hermitage for a one-month summer retreat every
year during which they receive teachings and learn to play ritual instruments. In
winter, since Klu 'bum and La kha are connected as "mother and son monasteries"
(ma dgon bu dgon) they have a common winter retreat in the 9th month). The
monasteries host the retreat in turn. From the 20th to the 30th day of the same
month, they perform a ritual with 'cham dance based on the sku gsum phur sgrub,
a gter ma text of gSang sngags gling pa as well as rituals of the cycle of gDugs dkar
and the ceremony of the smyong gnas fasting. The monastery was destroyed during
the Cultural Revolution. When I visited the site in 1997 I saw only the assembly hall
which had survived, but it was completely empty.
11. Income and expenses
The monks mainly live with their families since there are no monks' quarters
in the monastery. They must also provide their own food when they go to the
monastery for rituals.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of four communal divisions (shog khag):
Sa stod, Sa smad, Bar shod and Klu 'bum. Sa stod comprises Lo dbu with five
families and Rong ru with eleven families; Sa smad comprises Yang med with seven
families, mKhar sbe with five families and mKhar brag with three families, Bar shod
comprises only one village, Ri stod with ten families; Klu 'bum with four families.
In addition there is Su la village with five families.
13. Local festivals
The mountain behind the monastery is called She long glang chen, but there
is no la btsas on it. In the vicinity there are two mountains called Kyobs "byin and
Brag dkar, abodes of the yul lha deities bearing the same names. The dates of their
propitiation remain unnown.
433



14. Occupation of the local population
Farmers
Sources
(1) Interviews: A dga, a monk at Klu 'bum monaster (b.1939), bSod nams tshe ring
(b.1930), another monk at Klu 'bum Monastery
(154) La kha Monastery
1. Name
La kha Monastery is also called La kha 'Brug grags or gYung drung rab brtan
gling or bShad sgrub rab brtan gling.
2. Location
It is located at a place called La kha which is about 20 km south of the county
town. There is only one narrow winding path leading to the monastery, and it takes
about 5 hours on horseback from Ri snang, the seat of Nyag rong county to the
monastery.
3. History
According to oral tradition, a monastery was first founded at La kha by seven
monks. Since the inhabitants of the area believed they heard a dragon roar in the sky
when the monastery was being built, it was named La kha 'brug grags. The date of
its foundation remains unknown. In the Earth-Dragon Year of the 16th Rab byung
(1928), g Yung drung bstan'dzin, the twenty-fourth master in the Su la lineage,
moved the monastery to its present site, which is known as Bra khyung, and
renamed it bShad sgrub rab brtan gling.
g Yung drung bstan 'dzin, who studied for nine years in sMan ri in gTsang,
founded another monastery called A sta khang tshan che ba. Both these monasteries
have always been headed by the masters of the Su la lineage.
The cycles of the gSas mkhar mchog Inga and other old gter ma (gter rnying)
ritual texts were the only ritual traditions practised in this monastery, but later
gSang sngags gling pa's text sku gsum phur sgrub and its 'cham tradition, as well
as other new gter ma (gter gsar) ritual practices were introduced. The monastery
was destroyed during the Cultural Revolution and was "officially reopened" in the
nineteen eighties, but it had not yet been rebuilt when I visited it in 1997, because of
lack of funds (the local population is very poor).
434



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
4. Hierarchical system
-khri pa
- two dbu mdzad
- four dge skos
- two mchod dpon
- two spyi ba
The incumbents are appointed every three years on a rotating basis.
5. Current number of monks
There are fifteen novices and monks in the monastery.
6. Current education
The younger novices are taught by the elder monks.
7. Educational Exchange
La kha Monastery is a branch of Klu 'bum (No.153). There are some ritual
exchanges between the two monasteries (see below). The monks go to Shar rdza
Hermitage to take their full ordination,
8/9. Rituals
Since Klu 'bum and La kha are connected as "mother and son monasteries" (ma
dgon bu dgon), they have a common winter retreat in the 9th month). They host the
retreat in turn. The monastery's main ritual is based on the skugsum phur sgrub, a
gter ma text discovered by gSang sngags gling pa with its 'cham tradition.
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery possesses a copy of the printed edition of Bonpo Kanjur, in
addition to its own collection of texts.
11. Income and expenses
The monks provide their own food; the monastery receives very few donations
from the faithful as the local population is very poor.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of four villages: La kha with sixteen families,
Ba ru with ten families, La shod with four families and Dud rag with two families.
13. Local festivals
Both monks of the monastery and lay population propitiate two sacred
mountains, Kyobs 'byin and Brag dkar. The mountain behind the monastery is She
435



long glang chen (with no la btsas) associated to a local deity called She long who
has an elephant as mount.
14. Occupation of the local population
Farmers and nomads
Source
(1) Interview: Adga (b.1939), a monk at Klu 'bum Monastery, bSod nams tshe ring
(b.1930), another monk at Klu 'bum Monastery
(155) dBal khyung Monastery
1. Name of the monastery
The full name of the monastery is dBal khyung gYung drung mthong smon
gling. It is also known as dBal khyung gShen bstan mdo sngags gling.
2. Location
The monastery is located in rNga yab, southwest of Ri snang, the seat of
Nyag rong county. There is a 28 km motorable road between the county town
and Shang lang shod township, and another 15 km of road between the township
and philosophical college (bshad grwa) of skal bzang Monastery, dBal khyung
Monastery is around an hour's walk from the college.
3. History
In the 8th Rab byung (1447-1506), there were eight men considered as saints in
Nyag rong area, four of whom were Bonpo: Brag dben bra shis rgyal mtshan, dal
khyung sMon lam rgyal mtshan, rIsis 'das Nyi ma rgyal mtshan and Darri sByin pa
rgyal mtshan.
According to gYung drung don grub (dBal khyung dgon pallo rgvus, MS, p.4)
it was dBal khyung sMon lam rgyal mtshan who founded the monastery at rDzong
mgo in the 8th Rab byung (1447-1506). His son, Blo gros rgyal mtshan, succeeded
him as head of the monastery, but the monastery was destroyed by fire in the second
half of Nam mkha' grags pa's life, (another famous head of the monastery). It was
rebuilt during the life-time of Tshul khrims bstan rgyal. The monastery is believed
to have been moved during Sod nams dbang rgyal's time and was renamed Bal
khyuung gYung drung mthong smon gling.
Here is a list of the subsequent masters of the dBal khyung lineage: dBon po A
kru, IHun grub tshul khrims, bstan 'dzin rgya mtsho, Bla ma tshul khrims, Orgyan
rnam grol, Bla ma blo bzang, Karma ye shes, bsTan pa rgyal mtshan and gSang
436



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
sngags gling pa (1864-?). The latter played an important role in the development
of the monastery and Bon in the region. He enlarged the monastery, adding two
assembly halls ('du khang) and thirteen monks' cells (grwa shag). 'Chi med rig
dzin and mKha spyod dbang mo are also believed to have greatly contributed to
the monastery's development, and gYung drung don grub is the the present head
of the monastery who is assisted by sMon rgyal Iha sras. The latter is a tantric
practitioner. He was a son of Kun grol Hum chen, the sixth Kun grol grags pa and
brother of mKha' spyod dbang mo, a famous mkha' 'gro and discoverer of gter
ma texts in the 20th century. The monastery is famous for its unique and beautiful
manuscript set of the Bonpo Kanjur which miraculously survived the turbulences
of recent history. It was reproduced and published by A yung and Shug sdong skal
bzang phun tshogs in Chengdu 1985-1987 and again later by Mon rgyal lha sras, in
Lhasa in collaboration with the Tibet Academy of Social Sciences. The monastery
itself was totally destroyed, but was rebuilt by g Yung drung don grub in the
nineteen-eighties.
4. Hierarchical system
- one bla ma
- two dbu mdzad
- three dge skos
- one dkor gnyer
- two mchod dpon
With the exception of the head of the monastery, the incumbents of the
above-listed positions are reappointed every three years on a rotating basis.
5. Current number of monks
There were twenty-four monks and novices in the monastery in 1997.
6. Curent education
There are no regular, organized classes, and the young monks are taught by the
elder monks.
7. Educational exchange
The monks go to sMan ri Monastery (No. 1) in g Tsang and Shar rdza Hermitage
(No.138) for their ordination, further training and retreats.
8/9. Rituals
dBal khyung and Brag dben (No.156) Monasteries conduct four rituals together
at dBal khyung Monastery: the commemoration of gSang sngags gling pa from
the 25th to the 30th day of the 2nd month; the commemoration of mKha' spyod
437



dbang mo from the 23rd to the 28th day of the 3rd month; the tshes bcu ceremony
from the 1st to the 10th day of the 6th month and the dgu glor rite from the 21st to
the 29th day of the 11th month. Two rituals are performed collectively by the two
monasteries at Brag dben Monastery: the tshes bcu ceremony from the 3rd to the
10th day of the 7th month, and the dgu gtor rite from the 23rd to the 30th day of the
12th month at dBal khyung.
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has one copy of the Bonpo Kanjur, MS, one copy of the printed
edition of Dran pa 'bka thang, one copy of the printed edition of Pad ma bka thang,
a copy of the printed edition of Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan's collected works
in twenty-six volumes, and one copy the printed edition of g Ter chen Tshe dbang
grags pa's collected works.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery has five female yaks tended by several local families who give
the monastery 10 kg of butter per yak each year. The monks provide their own food
and the monastery otherwise depends on donations from the faithful.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of two shog khag (communal divisions),
bZhag ri and Kha lung. The former comprises five villages: bZhag ri with seventeen
families, Sa so with two families, Glang rong with one family, rGo dung with one
family and 'Ga' yeng with twelve families. The latter, Kha lung comprises eight
villages: Wa lung with one family, Bo mi with ten families, dBal khyung with four
families, Tso shis with two families, Chu shod with six families, Yang gzhung with
two families, Bung leng with three families and Kha 'khor with one family. All these
villages constitute the lha sde (local lay community) of both dBal khyung and Brag
dben monasteries
14. Occupation of the local population
Farming supplemented by animal husbandry
Source
(1) Interviews: Kun bzang nyi ma (b.1964), Ardo (b.1934)
438



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(156) Brag dben Monastery
1. Name
Brag dben Monastery has several names: Brag dben gsang mdzod pad ma
gling, Brag dben gsang mdzod pad ma mdo sngags gling and Brag dben g Yung
drung gling.
2. Location
The monastery is located in rNga yab, southwest of Ri snang, the seat of
Nyag rong county. There is distance of 28 km between the county town and Shang
lang shod township, and another 15 km between the township to the philosophical
college (bshad grwa) of skal bzang Monastery which may be reached by car. From
there it is an hour's walk to dBal khyung Monastery (No. 155) and another five to
Brag dben.
3. History
The earliest account concerning the monastery is a legend about the connection
between Brag dben and gShen Dar sding. (This connection is not mentioned in any
other source). According to this legend, Brag dben was a branch monastery of gShen
Dar sding in gTsang. gShen Gyal ba 'od zer, a disciple of Kun mkhyen Ye shes blo
gros, travelled to sBas gnas in Nyag rong in the 3rd Rab byung (1192-1251), where
he gave teachings based on the cycls of Ma rgyud, Khro bo, Phur pa and the Zhang
zhung snyan brgyud in accordance with the gShen tshang tradition and it seems
that sBas gnas became a hermitage from that time onwards. According to the Brag
dben dgon pa'i lo rgyus by gYung drung don grub (p.4. MS), Khod spungs Blo gros
thogs med and Khyung po Nang chen grags pa stayed at the hermitage for a long
period of time in the 5th Rab byung (1267-1326). In the 8th Rab byung (1447-1506)
Brag dben bra shis rgyal mtshan, one of the four Bonpo saints of the Eight Saints
of Nyag rong, (the other three were dBal khyung sMon lam rgyal mtshan, rTsis
das Nyi ma rgyal mtshan, and Darri Byin pa rgyal mtshan) built two temples and
fourteen meditation cells there, and thereafter the site was referred to as Brag dben
Monastery. Brag dben bkra shis rgyal mtshan spent the rest of his life there. In the
12th Rab byung (1687-1746), Sang rgyas gling pa visited the monastery and gave
teachings there. He also renamed the monastery Brag dben gYung drung gling. Then
"Od zer gling pa built four stupas around the monastery at the four points of the
compass. Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan and gSang sngags gling pa also visited
the monatery and gave teachings there. The monastery was destroyed during the
Cultural Revolution and was rebuilt in the nineteen-eighties by gYung drung don
grub, the present master.
439



4. Hierarchical system
- one bla ma
- two dbu mdzad
- three dge skos
- two mchod dpon
- one dkor gnyer
The incumbents of the above-listed positions are reappointed every three years.
The head of the monastery is gYung drung don grub.
5. Current number of mons
There are forty-five monks in the monastery in 1997.
6. Current education
There are no regular, organized classes. The young monks are taught by the
elder monks.
7. Educational exchange
Since Brag dben Monastery is a branch monastery of dBal khyung, the two
monasteries perform almost all their rituals together. The monks go to Manri
Monastery (No. 1) and Shar rdza Hermitage (No.138) for their ordination, further
studies or retreats.
8/9. Rituals
dBal khyung and Brag dben Monasteries conduct four rituals together at dBal
khyung Monastery: the memorial of gSang sngags gling pa from the 25th to the 30th
day of the 2nd month, that of mKha' spyod dbang mo from the 23rd to the 28th day
of the 3rd month.
The tshes bcu ritual from the 1st to the 10th day of the 6th month, and the
dgu gtor ritual from the 21st to the 29th day of the 11th month. Two rituals are
performed collectively by the two monasteries at Brag dben Monastery: the tshes
bcu from the 3rd to the 10th day of the 7th month, and dgu gtor from the 23rd to the
30th day of the 12th month.
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has a collection of Tshe dbang grags pa's gter ma works, one
copy of the biography of gSang sngags gling pa, one copy of the biography of
mKha''gro dbang mo, one copy of the Pad ma bka'thang and various texts for
liturgical purposes.



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
11. Income and expenses
The monastery depends on donations from the faithful and the monks provide
their own food.
12. Local community
The local lay community of the monastery consists of two shog khag
(communal divisions), bZhag ri and Kha lung. The former comprises five villages:
bZhag ri with seventeen families, Sa so with two families, Glang rong with one
family, rGo dung with one family and Ga yeng with twelve families. Kha lung, the
second shog khag comprises eight villages: Wa lung with one family, Bo mi with ten
families, dBal khyung with four families, Tso shis with two families, Chu shod with
six families, Yang gzhung with two families, Bung leng with three families and Kha
'khor with one family. All these villages constitute the lha sde local lay community)
of both dBal khyung and Brag dben monasteries.
14. Occupation of local population
Farming supplemented by animal husbandry
Source
(1) Interviews: Kun bzang nyi ma, born in 1964. A rdo (b.1934)
(157) Mi nub Monastery
1. Name
The full name of the monetary is dPal Idan mi nub g-yung drung gling.
2. Location
The monastery is located in Mi nub village, at the foot of Mount Bas gnas
gnam Icabs yang rdzong in A dzul valley of Nyag rong. The village belongs to Shod
ring Township which is 6 km south of the county town of Nyag rong. It takes two
hours from the Township to climb through a hill to the village.
The monastery is considered to be the residence of Khod spungs Blo gros thogs
med (1280-1337) who was a famous figure as a rediscoverer of gter ma texts in
the history of Bon religion. His biography contains a list of gter ma texts that he
rediscovered. After his life-story, there is also another chapter entitled gDung rabs
50 so'Y lo rgyus cung zad smos pa (p.28a) which records the names of the masters
who were close to Khod spungs Blo gros thogs med. It is just a list of names without
dates:
1) Blogros rgyal mtshan, a lay master who lived at Gong shel brag dmar phug
441



He founded a college for lay tantrics of Bonpo at mChog dge and had many
disciples. Towards the end of his life, he went to 'Du ra mdo in Me nyag
where executed the ritual of sa 'dul for the site of 'Du ra Monastery (No.
165). He died when he was 63.
2) rNam dag gtsug phud, a son of Khod spungs Blo gros thogs med. He went to
gYas ru dben sa Monastery in gTsang to study, and was the first monk in the
lineage. He gave teachings in sВa zhabs brag dkar hermitage, 'Dra yul chu
mig ljongs, Ge bshes khog, Khro skyabs and Cog tse. He died at Gyal mo
dmu rdo in Gyal rong.
3) sGrub gshen sNang Idan was born at sВa zhabs gnas and lived at Sha ra
thang in Nyag rong as a lay master. mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan
(1356-1415) became a pupil of him and gave all important teachings to him
such as Tshe dbang bya ri ma and Khyung dmar. He died when he was 71.
4) Grub chen Khyung rgod, a lay master and a son of Blo gros rgyal mtshan.
His real name was Khyung gsas bdud 'joms. He learnt religion from his
father. He was believed to have obtained the "rainbow body". He died at 55.
Then there were the thirteen masters in the same lineage:
1) Nam mkha' g-yung drung, a son of Grub chen Khyung rgod. He traveled
extensively and gave teachings in the rGyal rong area. He died at 60 in 'Dra
yul.
2) Seng ge blo gros, a son of Nam mkha' g-yung drung. He learnt religion from
his father and gave teachings in 'Dra yul and died when he was 63.
3) 'Dul ba rgyal mtshan, a son of Seng ge blo gros. He studied Bon under his
father and then went to sMan ri Monastery (No. 1) to study under the feet of
Rin chen rgyal mtshan, the fifth abbot of the monastery. Since he became
the religious teacher of the king of Khro chen, he spent years at mTsho mtho
Monastery (No.188). He had many disciples there although his residence
was in Nyag rong. He died when he was 60 at bZhag ra lha rtse hermitage in
Me nyag.
4) gSang ba mchog Idan was a lay master. He learnt religion from his uncle
"Dul ba rgyal mtshan, and went into retreat for twelve years on Mount Blon
po skos yag in Nyag rong. He died when he was 55.
5) A shar blo gros, a son of gSang ba mchog Idan. He entered sMan ri
Monastery and studied under bSod nams ye shes. He died when he was 70.
6) bsTan pa rgyal mtshan, a son of Khod spungs Gu ru. The latter was a
descendant of Grub chen khyung rgod. He followed A shar blo gros and
upheld both teachings and lineage. He became also a disciple of a Sa skya
bdag chen and ICags mdud "brug mo rdzong in Nyag rong. He traveled in
Gyal rong and Me nyag to practise meditation and became very famous. He
produced many sons. They were divided into three groups: Khod spungs
442



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
sKos yag pa, Yo kyun pa, and Mi nub tshang. He died when he was 60.
7) rJe bthun mgon po was a lay master. He studied under his father and Tshul
khrims 'od zer who was a descendant of Byang ba khro tshang. He had a
close relationship with dBratshang, the chief family in rDza khog of De
dge and also with the Buddhists in his area. He had a lot of disciples in Dza
khog and Tre hor. He died in Brag dmar hermitage in Nyag rong.
8) Gyal ba rin chen, a son of Je btsun mgon po. He was a lay master, but
attended many monasteries for studying and practising. He died when he
was 53.
9) rNam rgyal gragspa, a son of sNgags chung and a brother of rJe btsun mgon
po. He was a lay master and lived in Brag dmar mgo in Nyag rong. He spent
many years in Gyal rong and died when he was 40.
10) Rin chen Ihun grub, a son of rNam rgyal grays pa. He was a lay master and
studied under his father and 'Dra bla g Yung drung rgyal mtshan. He lived at
sBa zhabs brag dkar hermitage and traveled and taught in rDza khog, Nga
khog and rGyal rong. He died when he was 83.
11) gYung drung rnam rgyal, a son of Rin chen Ihun grub. He was a lay master
who traveled extensively in Gyal rong and died when he was 45.
12) g Yung drung bstan 'dzin, a son of g Yung drung ram rgyal. He was a monk
and took up ressidence in Zhu tshang Monastery for many years where he
gave teachings. He initiated founding several monasteries in Gyal rong. He
moved to Klu 'bum Monastery (No.153), but the present biography does not
mention it. He died when he was 70.
13) Nyi ma dbang Idan, a son of Jo sras. The latter was a member of the Khod
spungs family. Apart from Bonpo teachings, he also practised rNying ma
pa teachings and had very close relationship with the rNying ma pa. He
became the representative of Su la lineage which had a long line of teachers
that ended with Nam mkha'skyabs and brTson 'grus bzang mo. The lineage
of Khod spungs then became known as Su la tshang. After these thirteen
masters of the Khod spungs lineage, we know only the names of their
successors and it would be too cumbersome to give them all here.
A shar Blo gros, the 5th master, came from mChog dge Monastery to Mi nub
bco brgyad thang and founded a small monastery there. The date of foundation is
unknown. However, now nothing remains there apart from a stupa, a tsha tsha
khang and a piece of land which now belongs to the monastery called A shar zhing.
According to a brief history of the monastery provided by the monastery there was
a master of the Khod spungs lineage called Mi nub Shes rab rin chen, but in the
biography of Khod spungs Blo gros thogs med he is not mentioned. He is said to
have moved the monastery to the present site and built an assembly hall with four
pillars. The same source also states that his brother bs Tan "dzin was a master in the
443



monastery.
gSang sngags gling pa, Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan and dBra ston bskal
bzang bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan visited the monastery and gave teachings there. In the
1980s, the monastery got permission to be rebuilt.
4. Hierarchical system:
- two dbu mdzad (dbu mdzad and dbu skyor)
- four dge skos
- two mchod dpon
- one bdag gnyer
For the dbu mdzad, one has to be first dbu skyor for three years first, then the
dbu mdzad for another three years. The bdag gnyer stays for nine years. The rest
changes every three years.
6. Current number of monks
There are fifty-nine monks in the monastery.
7. Current education
Young monks follow old monks to learn teachings and practices. They go to
Shar rdza Hermitage (No.138) to follow further courses and receive ordination
8/9. Rituals
Four types of rituals are performed: the smon lam from the 3rd to 12th of the
first month; the observance of the smyung gnas fast from the 15th for few days, the
ritual of three cycles: Khro bo, Phur pa and Me ri from the 20th to 30th of the 12th
month; the observance of dbyar gnas fast from the 14th of the 6th month for fifty
days.
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has a complete set of Bonpo Kanjur and Katen, and a number of
ritual texts such as that of sTag la, Khro bo, Phur pa and Me ri.
11. Income and expenses
The monks have to find their food by themselves; the expenses of the
monastery depend on offerings of disciples.
12. Local community
The local villages are grouped into four communities (shog khag) who are
described as the lha sde of the monastery: 1. Ri'go village with twelve families,
rTa dbye with one family. 2. Rimda' village with twelve families. 3. Yul lung
444



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
village with twelve families; Zang mda' village with four families; Mi nub village
with eight families; Yul lung phug village with one family. 4. Shod ru village with
thirteen families; Bu bzhi with one family and Thog bi with two families.
13. Local festivals
A sacred mountain called skyobs 'byin is situated in the south-west of the
monastery. Both monks and lay people perform the circumambulation of the
mountain on the occasion of the Dog Year called gnas 'dus. The master who
"opened the door of holy mountain" (gnas sgo phye mkhan) was Khod spungs Blo
gros thogs med.
14. Occupation of the local population
Agriculture
Sources
(1) Interviews in autumn of 1997 with the following monks of the monastery: Tshe
thar (b.1963), the present dge bskos of the monastery, gYung drung dbang rgyal
(b.1969), Tshe dbang (b.1937), gDung dkar (b.1934) and Ha skyabs (b.1954)
(2) Texts:
- KGLG, Vol.1, pp. 393-395
Notes
"Chi med 'gro 'dul khod spungs blo gros thogs med kyi skyes rabs dang 'brel ba'i don gyi
rnam thar gdung rabs dang bcas pa rdzogs Idan springyi rol mo by dBra ston skal bzang
bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan (1897-1959), block print. In this work, the author described the
life of Khod spungs Blo gros thogs med to the time when he met bSod nams sgrol ma who
became his wife at the age of twenty-five. Then the biography strangely ends without any
reference to the second half of his life.
2 "Dra yul chu mig ljongs is a place in rTa'u County of dKar mdzes Prefecture in Sichuan
Province, dGe bshes khog, Khro skyabs, Cog tse, and Gyal mo dmu rdo traditionally
belong to the Gyal rong region.dGe bshes khog and Gyal mo dmu rdo are in Rong brag
County of dar mdzes Prefecture. Khro skyabs and Cog tse are in rNga pa Prefecture in
Sichuan Province.
3 Tre hor is an area in dKar mdzes County in dKar mdzes Prefecture.
4 Mi nub dgon pa i lo rgyus, the author is unknown, MS.
445



helby
County Seat
brDa-kin
District Seat
Township Seat
Administrative Village
River
Monastery
Mountain
Nyi-thag
Gyal-xhing
County Border
Township Border
River
Road
Footpath
Ra-lang a !
Ser-od
Nga-yab
Brag-dbe
N2-fope
1/540,000
Brag-dlar
dual-khyube
Yar-shogy
Gya-zin of
Goog-ral
sGang-ri
Ri-nang
Shang-lang-gshis
Ri-nang
sBral-mdo
N
Derya-rashi
Nyag Man-chad Ye-shes
Bang-rdal
cha
Klu-'bum
Nyag - rong County
Bang-smad
Ma-ri
Li-thang County
446



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(150) Ye shes Monastery, Plate 1



(150) Yo shes Monastery, Plate 2 Ag-yung Rinpoche gYung drung bstan
pa'i rgyal mtshan (1922-1996), head of the monastery
448



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(151) Gyal zhing Monastery
(152) Gong rgyal Monastery
449



(153) Klu 'bum Monastery
(155) dBalkhyung Monastery
450



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
(157) Mi nub Monastery
451



(158) rBa mda Monastery
1. Name
The full name of the monastery is rBa mda bDe chen bsam gtan gling. There
is a valley called rBa lung pa, and according to legend, three Indian saints lived in
the valley and worshipped a self-manifested stone statue of Vajrapani (Phyag rdor)
within a cave in the upper reaches of the valley. One day they forgot their rattan (rba
dbyug, "walking staffs") there, so the valley was named Badbyug bor ba'i lung pa,
"the valley of the lost rattan"; mda' means the lower reaches of the valley, thus rBa
mda' meaning "Lower rBa valley".
2. Location
The monastery is 23 km north of the county town of Brag mgo.
3. History
There are no reliable records concerning the history of the monastery. I
found only a brief history containing legendary accounts according to which a
Bonpo master called Gya mda' ri nang came to the sNyi khog valley and built the
monastery in the middle of the 6th Rab byung (1327-1386), after having built Chu
ring Monastery in Chu ring valley. Four generations later, bDud 'dul gragspa, the
valley's chief, forced the monastery to move to sPang dmar. The new monastery was
considerably enlarged to include a twenty-room assembly hall ('du khang) and fifty
monks' cells housing more than a hundred monks. Then I Ha lug tshul khrims moved
the monastery to a site called Lug ge where it remained active for seven generations.
The monastery was later moved again by Byang chub to gNas khog where it
remained for only fifty years, then dBra sras Zla ba grags pa, a son of dBra sprul
bsTan 'dzin dbang rgyal of rDza sTeng chen Monastery (No. 139) and a master of
Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan (who wrote his biography) rebuilt it at bDe cha and
named it bDe chen bsam gtan gling. At that time, it had an eighteen-room assembly
hall and fifteen monks' cells. He spent thirteen years at the monastery before "passing
away into his rainbow body" (ja'lus pa), at the beginning of the 20th century. Then
Tshul khrims 'od zer (1910-1971) and Do rje tshe dbang (1890-1962) who were
disciples of dBra sras Zla ba grags pa were in charge of the monastery for more than
forty years. Both were monks and had received teachings from Phun tshogs blo gros,
the abbot of sMan ri Monastery (No.1) at the time.
During the Cultural Revolution the monastery was knocked down and in the
1980s it was rebuilt with its twenty-five-room assembly hall and twenty-two monks'
cells by sPul sku Nam mkha''od zer gzhan phan mtha'yas (b.1937) and 'Jam
dbyangs.
sPul sku Nam mkha' is the rebirth of Zla ba grags pa and at present in charge
452



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
of the monastery. In addition to Bonpo teachings and practice, he learned Tibetan
medicine and worked at Brag 'go Hospital of Tibetan Medicine for twelve years.
4. Hierarchical system
-dgon bdag
- one dbu mdzad
- two dge skos
- two mchod g-yog
- one bdag gnyer
- one dngul gnyer
All of whom are reappointed every two years on a rotational basis.
5. Current number of monks
There are twenty-nine novices and monks at the monastery.
6. Current education
There are no organized classes and the novices are taught by the elder monks,
7. Educational exchange
The monastery has close ties with rTogs Idan Monastery (No.178) and sends its
novices there to take their ordination and for the practice of the lo gsum ("three-year
retreat").
8/9. Rituals
The observance of the bsnyen gnas abstinence and the smyung gnas fasting
from the 28th day of the 7th month to the 5th day of the 8th month, the ritual based
on the sku gsum sgrub pa for five days starting on the 25th day of the 12th month.
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has one printed copy of the Bonpo Kanjur two printed copies
of Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan's collected works, one manuscript copy of the
Khams chen and ten manuscript volumes of ritual texts.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery does not own any land or animals. The monks provide their own
food and the monastery relies on offerings from the faithful
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of five villages: rBa mtha' with six families,
rBa-mda' with twenty-three families, rTsi ri with five families, Kug rje with six
453



families and Tshi na with ten families.
S
h
13. Local festivals
The mountain behind the monastery is known as Khyung rdzong rin chen 'bar
ba and is considered as a sacred site. The local deity who resides on it called Ba
phye. Bya btang Tshe dbang 'gyur med is said to have sanctified the place.
It is believed that if barren women circumambulate the mountain, they will be
cured. There is another sacred mountain near the monastery known as Radmar brag.
14. Occupation of the local population
Farming supplemented by animal husbandry
Sources
(1) Interviews with the following monks at the monastery: Prul sku Nam mkha'
(b.1937), Tshe dbang mgon po (b.1939), dNgos grub bstan'dzin (b.1969) and
skal bzang dar rgyas (b.1942)
Notes
1rBa mda'dgon by Tre hor "Phrin las don grub, MS.
2 In Me nyag dialect, ishi means earth, na means black, thus Tshi na means "black earth".
3 Horyul snyi lung khyung rdzong 'bar ba'i gnas kyi dkar chag gsal ba'i me long by Tshe
dbang 'gyur med (alias Byang chub rig 'dzin gling pa), MS
(159) Gyal rong Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is gTo lung Yang dben dpal dgon. It is also called
gTo sgang g Yung drung gling.
2. Location
The monastery is located in a valley called gTo khog, 20 km southwest of Brag
'go, the county seat in dKar mdzes Prefecture.
3. History
Because Gyal rong gYung drung ye shes, the founder of the monastery, came
from Gyal rong, the monastery was called Gyal rong Monastery. There are no
reliable written sources concerning the site's history before that time. According to
legend, following King Khri srong Ide btsan's persecution of Bon in the 8th century
A.D., many Bonpo masters in Central Tibet fled to Amdo and Khams. One among
454



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai. Gansu and Sichuan
them, rMe'u bSod nams g-yung drung, established a hermitage in Tre horl, Khams,
Because the hermitage attracted ten thousand disciples, he extended the hermitage
into a monastery which then became known as Khri tsho, meaning "Ten Thousand".
After its destruction by fire, rТsa ra sTobs Idan 'od zer rgyal mtshan founded another
monastery called Shug sgang ("Hill of Cypress Trees", after the cypress forest on the
mountain on which it was located). It had an assembly hall ('du khang) with eight
rooms and more than twenty monks' cells below the assembly hall. It was again
destroyed by fire.
Following is a list of the successive masters:
1. Me'u bSod nams g-yung drung
2. rTsa ra sTobs Idan 'od zer rgyal mtshan
3. bkra shis bsam 'grub
4. gYung drung rgyal mtshan
5. gYund drung phun tshogs
6. Pad bsod
7. bs Tan 'dzin dbang Idan
8. dGu na Tshe bstan
9. Lo god
10. Lung phug
11. skal bzang skyabs
12. Chos bstan
13. Blo ldan
14. gYung drung rgyal mtshan
15. Gyal rong gYung drung ye shes
16. gYung drung rgyal mtshan alias gYung drung bstan'dzin
17. gSang engags grags pa
18. Grags pa
19. Nyi ma rgyal mtshan
20. gYung drung rgyal mtshan
21. Tshe dbang bstan'dzin
22. bkra shis don grub
23. Zla ba grags pa
Gyal rong gYung drung ye shes, the 15th master, was a son of the king 'Gran
rdzong in Gyal rong. He was a disciple of bSod nams g-yung drung, an abbot of
sMan ri Monastery (No. 1). While he was at Man ri, he also received teachings
from Tre ston bSod nams 'gyur med, Bru bla dBang rgyal, Zhu sgom Khri btsun
and sTag dbra Nam mkha''od zer. After completing his studies he began to practise
meditation in many hermitages throughout Amdo and Khams and finally founded
g To lung Yang dben dpal dgon in g To khog. In his time, there were about a hundred
monks in the monastery. It is said that there were two traditions of cham dances,
455



one belonging to the monastery and the other to the residence of the head of the
monastery (bla brang).
rGyal rong gYung drung ye shes was succeeded by bla ma g Yung drung bstan
'dzin who received teachings from many masters at Man ri. The latter became the
abbot of Gyal rong Monastery and founded a new monastery called gZhung ring
(No. 160). During his time, IHa brtan Padma ram rgyal, a dGe lugs pa master, came
to g To khog and succeeded in converting Gyal rong Monastery to the de lugs pa
tradition. He renamed it dGa'Idan phun tshogs gling. The new name was inscribed
over the entrance of the assembly hall in which statues of the Jo rje 'brom gsum
(Jo bo rje, rJe Tsong kha pa, 'Brom ston Gyal ba'i 'byung gnas) were installed.
However, when the king of Rab brtan was later defeated by the Manchu emperor
Qianlong, the monastery reverted to the Bonpo tradition.
Zla ba gragspa, the 23rd master, is said to have dissolved into a rainbow body
('ja'lus pa) when he died. The monastery was knocked down during the Cultural
Revolution and was rebuilt by Rig 'dzin nor bu and Nam mkha' od zer.
4. Hierarchical system
- one khri pa
- one dbu mdzad
- one dge skos
- one mchod dpon
- one bdag gnyer
The incumbents are reappointed on rotational basis every two years. The khri
pa must be a monk who has taken his vows at sMan ri Monastery
5. Current number of monks
There are forty novices and monks at the moanstery.
6. Current education
There are no organized classes, the novices are trained by the elder monks.
7. Educational exchange
The monks go to sMan ri Monastery to take their ordination
8/9. Rituals
The ceremony based on the Ngan song dong sprugs for five days, the smon lam
ceremony for five days, and the tshogs brgya offering and the ritual of Kun rig for
four days during the Tibetan New Year period; the general religious service (sku rim)
for one month starting in the 5th month; the dgu gtor rite with 'cham dance in the
12th month.
456



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has one old manuscript copy of Khams chen in sixteen volumes,
one old manuscript copy of Dri med gzi brjid in twelve volumes, (the copyist of both
manuscripts remains unknown), one printed copy of the Bonpo Kanjur, one printed
copy of Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan's collected works (Chamdo edition).
11. Income and expenses
The monastery depends on offerings from its followers and the monks provide
their own food
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of one village with twenty-two families.
13. Local festivals
Mount Khri tsho sgang located southwest of the monastery is believed to
be the abode of the local deity Khri tsho 'brug lha who has a dragon as mount.
It was sanctified by Zla ba grags pa as a sacred mountain and is venerated in the
Monkey-Year. There is also a hill near the monastery called Gorgor mig associated
with the local deity Lung ye. Both Khri tsho 'brug Iha and Lung ye are regarded as
attendants of another local deity called sku bla Yong mgon!
14. Occupation of the local population
Farming supplemented by animal husbandry
Source
(1) Interview with 'Chi med grags pa (b.1936), a monk at the monastery
Notes
1 Tre hor corresponds to the former/original division of the territory comprising dar
mdzes County -- with the exception of Zla thang ma township - and Tre hor township
of Brag 'go County, in dKar mdzes Prefecture, Sichuan Province).
2 gYong drung bon gyi bstan "byung phyogs bsdus by dPal tshul, Bod ljong mi rigs dpe
skran khang, Lhasa, 1988,
3 gNas bdag sku bla yongs mgon gyi bsang mchod, p.3, MS
457



(160) gZhung ring Monastery
com
1. Name of monastery
The full name is gZhung ring (also spelt gZhu ring) bkra shis smin grol gling.
2. Location
It is located 41 km southeast of the county town of Brag.go.
3. History
According to gZhung ring dgon by Sang dga', gYung drung bstan'dzin, the
founder of the monastery, was born into a leading family of dGe bshes tsa (also
written rdza, rtsa) valley in Gyal rong in the Earth-Dog Year of the 11th Rab byung
(1658). He founded the monastery in 1691. Around thirty generations later, a family
in de bshes tsa valley produced another important master, known as 'Chi med grub
dbang. His reincarnation was sTon bla bsTan 'dzin rgyal mtshan. The present master
is called Tshe dbang g-yung drung.
4. Hierarchical system
- one dbu mdzad
- one dge skos
- two mchod g-yog
- four gnyer pa (two bdag gnyer ba, one dngul bdag)
-one risis pa
The dge skos and the gnyer pa are replaced every two years on a rotating basis,
the mchod g-yog every year, and the dbu mdzad every three years.
5. Current number of monks
There are thirty-five monks at the monastery.
6. Current education
There are no organized classes, the younger monks are trained by the elder
ones. They go to Shar rdza Hermitage (No.138) for ordination and further training,
8/9. Rituals
The smon lam prayer from the 5th to the 11th day of the 1st month; the ritual
Bla ma'i mchod pa and the mDo g-yung drung klong rgyas from the 11th to the 15th
day of the same month with the 'cham dance on the last day. The 'cham include the
mChod pa'i lha mo brgyad, dPal Idan lha mo, gShin rje lha dgu, Dam can shel khrab
and dar lam bcu. The smyung gnas fast from the 5th day of 6th month to the 4th
day of the 7th month; the ritual cycle of Ma rgyud for seven days in the 7th month;
458



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
the ritual sTag la'i dgu sgrub from the 1st to the 10th day of the 10th month.
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has one copy of the Bonpo Kanjur published by A yung and
skal bzang phun tshogs; one copy of the collected works of Shar rdza bra shis
rgyal mtshan; one copy of the collected works of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal
mtshan, the Chamdo edition; two copies of the wood block prints of the Dran pa'l
bka' thang and those of the Tshe dbang bka'thang from Gong rgyal Monastery
(No.152).
11. Income and expenses
The monastery depends on offerings from its followers, the monks provide
their own food.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of twelve villages: Kha 'brog village with
twenty familes, Ri nya with six families, sTag lung with five families, sMi nub with
seven families, Khri cha with three families, 'Uggling with six families, rDzas nub
with ten families, Brag 'go with nine families, Ba nang with four families, Sa dmar
with fourteen families, sPang yul with eleven families and Glas rkong with one
family.
13. Local festivals
The mountain facing the monastery is known as dGa' Idan dpal ri. It
is propitiated in the 6th month by both monks and lay communities and is
circumambulated by both Bon po and Buddhists. The mountain was "opened" by
Sangs rgyas gling pa. The mountain behind the monastery is called Khro bcu brag
or Khro chu brag and is associated with three local deities known collectively as
Gong gsum and individually as rDo rje btsan rgod, g Yung drung 'od 'bar and Do sho
btsan rje (cach is represented by one peak of the three peaks and each has its own la
btsas). The dates of their propitiation are the 1st day of the 1st month, the 13th day
of the 4th month and the 15th day of the 6th month. Only the Buddhists propitiate
Do rje btsan rgod, even though this local deity is mentioned in several Bon po ritual
texts; gYung drung 'od 'bar is propitiated by both Bonpo and Buddhists: Do sho is
no longer propitiated.
14. Occupation of the local population
Farming supplemented by animal husbandry
459



Sources
(1) Interview with the following monks of the monastery in autumn of 1997: skal
bzang nyi ma (b. 1945), m on lo (mGon po rdo rje, b.1922) and A g-yung
(6.1947)
(2) Text:
-gZhung ring dgon by Sang dga', MS
460



dKar-mdzes County
VL
Dzam-thang County
i-khong-ma stud-pa
"Dun-mda
Phyag.ru
River
County
Nyag-rong County
Shis-mdo
Shis-mdo
Brag
©
County Seat
rTa'u County
O
District Seat
Shwa-rwa-thing
Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal. Gansu and Sichuan
•
•
Township Seat
Administrative Village
Monastery
County Border
Township Border
•
River
Road
461
1/650,000



(158) Ba mdal Monastery
(159) Gyal rong Monastery



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(160) gZhung ring Monastery
463



rTa'u County
rTa'u county is located around the lower reaches of Phyag ru river (a tributary
of rDza chu) in northeastern dKar mdzes Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture, Sichuan
Province. The county covers an area of 7,546 sq km. The county has 144 villages
divided between 23 townships. The county seat is rTa'u (latitude: 30°59', longitude:
101°07', altitude: 3,007m).
(161) Sam 'grub Monastery
1. Name
The full name of the monastery is 'Dra gYung drung bsam 'grub gling.
2. Location
The monastery is located in a valley of Phyag ru river, 55 km south of rTa'u,
the county seat.
3. History
bSam 'grub combines three monasteries: Brag ra, 'Ong gong and Mong skyid.'
1) Brag ra Monastery was founded by Khod po Blo gros thogs med, in the
Iron-Ox year of the 5th Rab byung (1301). Blo gros thogs med built a small
temple and another for practitioners (sgrub khang) in Brag ra when he
sanctified Mount Ba zhabs brag dkar, and named them Khod po Monastery.
The place was successively named sNgags sde byang chub gling by Khyung
rgod, bDud 'dul yang rtse gling by Nyi ma dbang Idan, and gNas sgo pad ma
gling by gSang sngags gling pa (1864-?) when each of these masters visited
the monastery. Following is a list of the successive masters of the monastery:
1. Blo gros rgyal mtshan
2. rNam dag gtsug phud
3. Grub gshen sNang Idan
4. Nyi ma dbang Idan (who rebuilt a larger assembly hall ('du khang) with
twelve columns)
5. Me nag rTogs ldan
6. rTul 'dre rTogs Idan
7. Go tog rTogs Idan
8. dBra ston Rin chen
9. Khyung gter 'Od zer gling pa
10. Khod spungs dBang Idan (for twenty years)
11. gYung drung dpal bzang (for eighteen years)
12. Thugs rje gling pa (for a few years)
464



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
13. gYung drung bstan'dzin (for three years)
14. bsTan pa rgyal mtshan (for a few years until the Cultural Revolution)
The monastery originally comprised of an assembly hall, a kitchen (ja khang), a
mchod rten, and a residence for the monks (grwa khang). It had two establishments,
one for the ritual cycle of dBal gsas (dbal gsas sgrub grwa) and another for the
atonement ritual of the goddess Srid pa rgyal mo (srid rgyal sgrub grwa). It had
a giant thangka and a large collection of books including a complete manuscript
copy of the Bonpo Kanjur made by Khod po Blo gros thogs med. The monks were
required to take their ordination vows at Man ri Monastery (No.1).
2) 'Ong gong Monastery was founded by Khod po Blo gros thogs med at
Cang log sna.' It started out as a hermitage and gradually expanded into
a monastery, but fell into decline owing to an ongoing dispute with Nya
mtsho. As a result it was moved to sMug rong dgu rdza brag dkar, but fell
into decline again soon after its reconstruction, as two thirds of the monks
were converted to Buddhism.
The remaining monks followed Nyi ma rgyal mtshan, who at that time had
returned to 'Dra valley from Man ri. The site where they settled was called Ge
gsar in the local dialect, which probably means dgon gsar, "new monastery"; the
ruins of a stupa are still visible. A master of the monastery called A khu Ye shes,
rebuilt a 'du khang with four columns and the monastery became known as 'Ong
gong. Following is a list of the successive abbots of the monastery until the Cultural
Revolution:
1. dBal 'gugs skal bzang rgyal mtshan
2. rTogs Idan Tshul khrims mam dag
3. dBal 'dzin bsTan 'dzin dbang rgyal
4. rTogs Idan Sangs rgyas
5. Dzong lu Ye shes
6. A 'be Tshul khrims
7. Ratsho lcags thar
There were about eighty novices and monks at the monastery in the mid-20th
century. They were required to go to sMan ri Monastery for three years training and
ordination vows.
3) According oral tradition, sMong skyid Monastery was founded in the 6th
Rab byung (1327-1386) by the three brothers of Khro tshang who travelled
from gShen Dar sding Monastery to 'Dra valley in Khams. It was called
Glang 'ong. The eldest brother was called g Yung drung rgyal mtshan. After
a few generations, the monastery was moved to Mong skyid and became
known as Mong skyid dgon rnying, the "old sMong skyid Monastery".
Later when it was moved again it was known as both Mong skyid dgon
gsar, the "New sMong skyid Monastery", and Phun tshogs gling. There were
465



forty novices and monks at the monastery.
In the 1980s, the masters of the three monasteries, sPrul sku Zla ba gragspa,
mkhan po bsTan 'dzin nyi ma, mKhan po gYung drung dbang rgyal, mKhan zur
'Chi med, mKhan po Lothar, Wa lo mGon po and 'Gyur med agreed to rebuild the
three monasteries together as one monastery. The reconstruction was completed in
1989. Khyung sras bsTan 'dzin nyi ma is the present mkhan po and Zla ba grags pa
(b.1936) is the present khri pa. S
4. Hierarchical system
- one khri pa
eite
- two dbu mdzad
- nine spyi ba
- two mchod g-yog
All the incumbents are reelected every three years.
5. Current number of monks
There are sixty-seven novices and monks at the monastery.
6. Current education
There are no organized classes. The young novices are trained by the elder
monks.
7. Educationa exchange
There are no regular exchanges with other monasteries. The novices take their
ordination vows in the monastery during the summer fast (dbyar gnas).
8/9. Rituals
- 6th month: the ritual cycle of Ma rgyud from the 1st to the 6th day with the
following cham dances on the 7th day: rNam brgyad, dMag dpon, sTag, Seng
ge and Dam can brgyad according to the Nang so tradition.
- 8th day of the 6th month: religious services (zhabs brtan) and the tea offering
(gser skyems) followed by the 'cham dances: sTag la'i mnga 'cham, dBal gsas
tshogs 'cham according to the tradition of the Central Tibetan monasteries
(grwa sa); dBal gsas tshogs 'cham, dMu bdud, Dam can brgyad and Gyal po
according to the Nang so tradition.
- 9th day of the 6th month: tea offering ceremony(gser skyems), the ritual cycle
of Me ri, and the following cham dances: rNam brgyad, sTag la'i mnga 'cham,
dBal gsas tshogs 'cham, Ma rgyud tshogs 'cham, Dam can brgyad, and dMag
466



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
dpon according to the tradition of the Central Tibetan monasteries (grwa sa).
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has a printed copies of the collected works of mNyam med Shes
rab rgyal mtshan's and Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan.
11. Income and expenses
The main expenses of the monastery are the three major rituals: Ma rgyud
sgrub mchod, the summer fast (dbyar gnas) and the dgu gtor rite. The three spyi ba
are responsible for organizing the rituals: for the Ma rgyud sgrub mchod, the three
spyi ba collect 10 kg of barley from each monk in the monastery; for the dbyar gnas,
each family offers as much barley as it can, and the dgu gtor rite is organized and
sponsored by the monastery itself.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of four communities (shog khag): Brag ra,
rMang dkyil, Wur go and Shar phyogs. Brag ra community comprises two villages:
Kha lo with fifteen families and Gya bye with fifteen families, rMang dkyil
community comprises three villages: Wa de with eight families, skal tsho with
eighteen families, bSu 'go with four families: Wur go community comprises only
one village: Wur go with nineteen families; Shar phyogs community comprises only
one village: Shar phyogs with twenty-three families.
13. Local festivals
The mountain behind the monastery is called sKu bla Ri mchog and is the
residence of a local deity of the same name. There is a la btsas on its summit.
Khod po Blo gros thogs med unveiled the mountain as a sacred mountain (ynas ri),
and as the celestial abode of the tutelary deity Ma rgyud in the 13th century. The
revelation was confirmed by gSang sngags gling pa (1864-?) in the 19th century.
The mountain's circumambulation takes place on the 1st day of the 1st month and
the 13th day of the 5th month. The mountain facing the monastery is called Seng ge
rgyab bsnol and its three peaks are believed to represent the three local deities Seng
ge rgyab bsnol, 'Brong nus and Brag li. There is a la btsas on each peak which are
renewed by both religious and lay communities on the same day as the festival of the
mountain behind the monastery. Seng ge rgyab bsnol and Brag li were sanctified by
Thugs rje gling pa, a master from Nyag rong in the early 20th century, and 'Brong
nus by gSang sngags gling pa. There is another sacred mountain called sPos ri ngad
Idan which is located northeast of the monastery, and which was sanctified by gSang
sngags gling pa. There is also la btsas on its summit.
467



14. Occupation of the local population
Farmers
Sources
(1) Interview in autumn 1997 with Zla ba grags pa (b.1936).
(2) Texts:
- bSam 'grub dgon pa by 'Phrin dga', MS
- 'Dra g-yung drung bsam 'grub dgon gvi lo rgyus mdor bsdus by bsTan 'dzin
nyi ma and Zla ba grags pa, MS
Notes
I sMong skyid Sam grub dgon by 'Phrin dga', MS, it is also referred to as sMongs dkyid
in 'Dra g-yung drung bsam grub dgon gyi lo rgyus mdor bsdus by bsTan 'dzin nyi ma
and Zla ba grags pa, MS.
Chi med 'gro 'dul Khod spungs Blo gros thogs med kyi skyes rahs dang 'brel baldon gyi
mam thar gdung rabs dang bcas pa rdzogs ldan sprin gyi rol mo by dBra ston skal bzang
bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan (1897-1959), block print. For further information, see notes under
Mi nub Monastery (No.157).
3 Cang log sna belongs to khub chags township of Ta'u county
4 KGLG p.513: Nyag smad rgya mtshams su 'dra ba li chu khar bon dgon che ba gcig
refers to Sam 'grub Monastery.
5 According to oral tradition, two brothers of Nang so king in de bshes tsa valley in
rGyal rong, gYung drung bstan'dzin and gYung drung ye shes, were sent to sMan ti
Monastery to study. Because of the king who was gravely ill, gYung drung bstan'dzin
was recalled to Gyal rong, but before leaving Man ri he asked Shes rab dbang rgyal,
the abbot of Man ri Monastery at the time, if he could establish a new 'cham tradition in
Gyal rong since he was not able to learn the entire grwa sa "cham tradition of Man ri.
The abbot accepted, and thus, upon his return, he established the Nang so 'cham tradition
which eventually spread to the Nyag rong, Ta'u, Brag 'go and Gyal rong areas. In this
monastery, both traditions of cham are performed. The term grwa sa in Bonpo tradition
refers to Manri and g Yung drung gling monasteries.
(162) Chu mig Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is 'Dra Chu mig gYung drung bstan rgyas gling.
Because the first site of the monastery was located near a spring, the monastery was
called Chu mig monastery.
468



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
2. Location
The monastery is located 81 km southwest and a further three hours' walk from
rTa'u, the county seat.
3. History
According to legend, during Gri gum btsan po's time, because of the
persecution of Bon in Central Tibet, Me nyag Ce tsha mkhar bu, a famous Bonpo
master, escaped to Khams and established a hermitage in 'Dra valley which became
the first Bonpo establishment in the area. Later, during Khri srong Ide btsan's
persecution of Bon, sNya chen Bla ma, a Bonpo master and a descendant of sNya
chen Li shu stag ring, another great Bonpo master, also escaped to Khams and took
refuge in 'Dra where he rebuilt the hermitage which later became the first Bonpo
monastic establishment in the area. According to the same legend, he brought a
cypress branch from Mount Kong po Bon ri and planted it in 'Dra valley where it
grew into a tree which exists to this day. There is a village called sNya gad' in the
valley which is said to have preserved numerous ancient texts inherited from their
ancestors, but unfortunately they were all destroyed during the Cultural Revolution.
Shortly after, Byang Nyi ma rgyal mtshan, a descendant of Khro tshang in Dza
khog brought to the monastery a statue representing gShen rab Mi bo as a three-year
old boy from Central Tibet. He also enlarged the monastery. His residence (of
which only the ruins remain today) was called Pho nyi bla brang. Later, a master
called g Tsug phud moved the monastery to its present site and renamed it Chu mig.
According to the same legend, he was a descendant of the sPa tshang family based
in Yu ring village, Central Tibet.
Later, Khod po Blo gros thogs med (1280-1337) arrived in 'Dra valley and
unveiled the sacred mountain (gnas ri) of 'Dra gnas the'u bo. Among his foremost
disciples there were the Seven Great Lamas. One of the seven was a master from
sNya gad village situated near Chu mig Monastery.
dGe bshes g Yung drung bstan'dzin, the founder of Brag ra Monastery, took
Chu mig Monastery under his wing, and thus the two monasteries developed close
ties during his lifetime. Hor ra bDud 'dul also came to 'Dra valley and founded
Seng ge Monastery. This was the first Buddhist monastery in the area. From the
time of Khyung gter 'Od zer gling pa onwards, most masters of his lineage looked
after the monastery. Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan, Bya btang Tshe dbang 'gyur
med, dBra ston bskal bzang bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan visited the monastery to give
teachings. In the first half of 19th century, Abdud IHun 'grub rdo rje, A lung Blo
gros rgyal mtshan, Khyung po Nyi ma rgyal mtshan, Orgyan Thug rje gling pa were
the successive masters of the monastery.
The monastery was razed during the Cultural Revolution and rebuilt in the
1980s under the leadership of Bla ma Nor bu. Khyung doon Rigdzin Yon tan ram
469



rgyal gave teachings there in 1990 which marked the resumption of the monastery's
religious activities. Khyung sras bsTan 'dzin nyi ma is the present mkhan po.
4. Hierarchical system
- one khri pa
- one bla ma
- two dbu mdzad
- two dge skos
- nine spyi ba
- two mchod g-yog
5. Current number of monks
There are fifty novices and monks at the monatery,
6. Current education
There are no organized classes. The young novices are trained by the elder
monks.
7. Educational exchange
The monastery has no special ties with any other monastery, Occasionally the
monks go to Manri (No.1) or Shar rdza Hermitage (No.138) for further teachings,
practice and ordination vows.
.
8/9. Rituals
- 4th month: ritual based on the bDe chen zhi sgrub for eight days from the 8th,
followed by the prayer to sMon lam mtha' yas, the smyung gnas fast for ten
days with ritual based on the Klong rgyas
- 6th month: the summer rituals (dbyar cho) for three days from the 3rd
day together with the ritual cycle of dBal gsas and gTso mchog ending
with the 'cham dances for two days (the same as those performed at Sam
'grub Monastery (No.161); the ritual cycle of Phur pa according to the "New
revelation" (gter gsar) tradition for five days in the same month; the summer
fast (dbyar gnas) from the 14th day of the 6th month for fifty days
- 12th month: the dgu gtor rite from the 25th day for five days
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has one printed copy of Kanjur and one printed copy of Dran pa
bka'thang and Tshe dbang bka'thang - printed from the woodblocks kept at Gong
rgyal Monastery (No.152).



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
11. Income and expenses
The monastery depends on offerings from the faithful. The monks provide their
own food
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of four villages: Yar grong with twenty-six
families, Mar grong with twenty-seven families, dGong thog with ten families and
Yi te with eight families.
13. Local festivals
The mountain behind the monastery is sku bla mThe bo and is the residence of
the local deity of the same name. There is no fixed date for its propitiation.
14. Economic occupation of the local population
Farmers
Sources
(1) Interview in autumn 1997 with: Zla ba grags pa (b.1936), the head of Sam
'grub Monastery
(2) Texts:
- 'Dra chu mig 8-yung drung bstan rgyas gling gi lo rgvus mdor bsdus by Rig
'dzin nyi ma, MS
- Chu mig dgon by 'Phrin dga', MS
- a letter dated 23rd day of the 8th month 1999 from Zla ba grags pa concerning
the history of Chu mig Monastery
Notes
I snya is the name of a clan descending from sNya chen Li shu stag ring and sNya chen
bla ma; gad means 'spread' in the Me nyag dialect, thus sNya gad means "the tribe that
spread from sNya".
The only two references concerning the history of the monastery have different views
on this point: 'Dra chu mig dgon gYung drung bstan rgyas gling gi lo rgyus by Rig
'dzin nyi ma says that Nyi ma rgyal mtshan and g Tsug phud were one and the same
person, whereas the Chu mig dgon by 'Phrin dga' considers that they were two different
personages. The former was from Gyal rong and the latter from spa lineage in Central
Tibet, and g Tsug phud was the founder of the monastery and the monastery became
known as Chu mig during his time.



(163) dGu rdza Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is dGu rdza (or rdzab) dgon dPal Idan g-yung drung
gling. It was also known as gSang phug or Dza lung.
2. Location
The monastery is 28 km south of Ta'u, the county seat.
3. History
Oral tradition relates two legendary accounts of the monastery. According to
one of the legends, after the decline of a Bonpo monastery founded by Khod po Blo
gros thogs med (1280-1337) at Cang lo sna in rTa'u, several of its elder monks went
to the sacred mountain Ba zhabs brag dkar and founded a hermitage there which
later developed into a monastery. According to the other legend, a Bonpo saint called
Nam mkha' snang mdog from Gyal rong founded gSang phug, a hermitage on the
same sacred mountain that gradually expanded into a monastery known by the same
name
The monastery was looked after by the descendants of Khod po Blo gros thogs
med. Later 'Gro mgon Tshe dbang 'gyur med, 'Go mgon Shes rab dgongs rgyal,
"Gro mgong Yung drung tshul khrims, Nam mkha' rgyal mtshan and Nam mkha'
bsam 'grub gave teachings at the monastery. It seemed to have enjoyed a long period
of prosperity that ended when a group of local Buddhist chiefs who envious of the
monastery's wealth hired a gang of thieves to ransack and burn down the monastery.
Many years later, during the dGe lugs pa persecution when many Bonpo
monasteries in the area were force to disband, rDza dGe sprul Yid bzhin legs
grub, undaunted by the dGe lugs pa sectarian policy, went to Dartsedo to obtain
permission to rebuild at least one Bonpo monastery. He combined nine Bonpo
monasteries together into one and called it dGu rdza dgon, the "Nine Monasteries in
the Clay Mountain". After that, it was maintained by g Yung drung rgyal mtshan and
Byams pa 'phrin las for many years. It was wrecked during the Cultural Revolution
and was rebuilt and resumed its religious activities in the 1980s.
4. Hierarchical system
- one khri pa
- one dbu mdzad
- one dge skos
- two mchod dpon
- two spyi ba
All of whom are replaced every three years with the exception of the spyi ba



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
who is replaced every year.
5. Current number of monks
There are twenty-one novices and monks at the monastery.
6. Current education
There are no organized classes. The young novices are trained by the elder
monks.
7. Educational exchange
The monks go to Shar rdza hermitage for ordination vows and teachings, and
occasionally for the three-year retreat.
8/9. Rituals
The smon lam prayer ceremony from the 10th to 19th day of the 1st month;
the smyung gnas fast for ten days in the 4th month (the dates are determined by the
monastery); the dbyar gnas summer fast from the 9th to 23rd day of the 6th month.
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has only one printed copy of dBra ston skal bzang bstan pali
rgyal mtshan's collected works,
11. Income and expenses
The monastery depends on offerings from its followers. The monks provide
their own food
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of two communities (shog khag): 1Cags
rkang and sMigri. ICags rkang community comprises seven villages: Bar sha with
nine families, Sa ya with six families, Sa re with four families, Yo sho with fourteen
families, mKhar chag with six families, 'Brog pa with four families and sNgun
'dus with four families; sMig ri community comprises six villages: dGu smad with
three families, sNye ri with ten families, Ci ti with seven families, Nya rgyu with ten
families, Kha lang with seven families and 'Brog pa with twelve families.
13. Local festivals
There is a la btsas on top of the mountain behind the monastery. No date is
fixed for its renewal ceremony which is performed by Bonpos only
The mountain facing the monastery, sВa zhabs brag dkar, is the most
important sacred mountain in the area, Khod po Blo gros thogs med sanctified it
473



and discovered a number of important Bonpo gter ma texts there. The mountain is
venerated every Monkey-Year by both Bonpo and Buddhists who circumambulate
the mountain in the direction prescribed by their respective traditions. There is a
short anonymous text about the mountain entitled s Ba zhabs brag dkar dkar chag
dad pa'i glu dbyangs, which mentions another longer text entitled Ba zhabs brag
dkar byin labs shugs 'byung.
14. Occupation of the local population
Farming supplemented by animal husbandry
Sources
(1) Interviews with following monks at the monastery in autumn 1997: 'Chi med
dbang phyung (b.1929), Blo kho (Blo bzang dpal Idan) (b.1942), sMon lam nor
bu (b.1969)
(2) Texts:
-dGu rdzab dgon by 'Phrin dga', MS
-Ba zhabs brag dkar dkar chag dad pa'i glu dbyangs, anonymous, MS
- a short, untitled and anonymous text about the history of the monastery, MS
(164) Dam pa rang grol Monastery
1. Name
The monastery is also known as sTon pa rang grub.
2. Location
The monastery is located 87 km south of the town Ba smad of Ta'u county.
3. History
There are two legends about the origin of the monastery and its name.
According to one legend recorded by 'Phrin dga' which I also heard when I visited
the monastery in 1997, Dam pa rang grol, a Bonpo master from dGe bshes tsa in
Rong brag (rGyal rong), came to Ba smad and established a hermitage there in the
3rd Rab byung (1147-1206). The hermitage gradually expanded into a monastery
which was named after its founder.
According to the other legend, a Bonpo master called Rig 'dzin Shar barnal
'byor attempted to make a statue of gShen rab Mi bo, but despite his efforts he did
not succeed, so in the end he threw out the unfinished statue into the monastery's
courtyard and returned to his room. The next morning, the statue had become a
perfect representation of gShen rab Mi bo. It was named sTon pa Rang grub, the
474



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
"self-manifesting master" and the monastery was named after it. The statue is
believed to have survived until the mid-20th century.
Although there is a list of masters which 'Phrin dga' claims represents the
lineage of the monastery's masters, it is obvious that there are several names in the
list that have nothing to do with the monastery's history so I did not find it necessary
to include it here. The monastery was rebuilt and resumed its religious activities in
the 1980s. The last three descendants of Khod po Blo gros thogs med who looked
after the monastery are Blo gros, his nephew (khu dbon gdung brgyud), Do rje, and
the latter's nephew, Nor bu dbang chen (b.1967), who is the present khri pa of the
monastery
4. Hierarchical system
- one khri pa
- one dbu mdzad (with no predetermined term of office)
- one dge skos (replaced every three years)
- two spyi gnyer (with no predetermined terms of office)
one mchod dpon (with no predetermined term of office)
5. Current number of monks
There are fifteen novices and monks in the monastery.
6. Current education
There are no organized classes. The young novices are trained by the elder
monks.
7. Educationa exchange
The monks go to Shar rdza Hermitage (No.138) to take their ordination vows.
8/9. Rituals
- 2nd month: a ritual known as khang tshe, based on the ritual cycle of Tag la
from the 7th to the 13th day
- 4th month: the summer offerings (dbyar mchod) from the 3rd to the 15th day
followed by a 'cham dance on the last day (the dances include Ara ka co,
Keng rus, sTag la, dBal gsas, the four dMag dpon, the four sNgags pa, the
four Dur khrod, the four 'Bum pa, tigre, lion, Srid pa rgyal mo and Dam can)
- 12th month: the smyung gnas fast for eight days beginning on the 16th and the
winter offerings (dgun mchod) on the 24th and 25th days
10. Manuscripts and printed books
The monastery has one manuscript copy of Khams chen in sixteen volumes.
475



11. Economic circumstances of the monastery
The monastery has eight acres (mu) of land which are used to cultivate barley,
It also receives offerings from its followers. The monks provide their own food.
12. Local lay community
The local lay community consists of two communities (shog khag): Ba smad
community comprises four villages: Ngo nya with ten families, Ba smad with
fifteen families, Sa skya with four families and Ma dzi with two families; Garthar
community comprises only one village: Mar cho' with three families. In addition
there are several villages in the neighboring county of Dartsedo: Ngo nya village!
with seven families, Ba smad with eight families, mKhar ma with ten families and
sku nub with three families.
13. Local festivals
The mountain behind the monastery is known as Wa zur and is the residence
of the local eponymous deity. Its la htsas is at the top of the mountain. The deity is
propitiated twice a year, on the 3rd day of the 1st month and the 11th day of the 4th
month.
The mountain on which the monastery is located is regarded as sacred and
is called Dam pa rang grol. Its distinctive features are four rocks resembling
self-manifested sculptures: the sun and moon to the east, a stupa to the south, a vajra
to the west, and a white conch shell to the north. The mountain is propitiated in the
Sheep Year.
14. Economic occupation of the local population
Farming supplemented by animal husbandry.
Sources
(1) Interviews with the following monks at the monastery in autumn 1997: Rig 'dzin
don 'grub (b.1934), rDo rje (b.1933), Ya ma tshe ring (b.1949)
(2) Texts:
- Dam pa rang grol dgon by 'Phrin dga', MS
Notes
1 Dam pa rang groldgon by 'Phrin dga', MS.
2 the term cho means village in the local Me nyag dialect.
3 This tribe is geographically the same village as Ngo nya of Basmad shog khag mentioned
above, but belongs to another administrative division. The same applies to the following
cight families of Ba srnad.
4 Shar mi 'gyur gvi nyi zla rang byon, lho mi 'gyur gvi mchod ren rang byor, nub mi gyur
476



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
gyi rdo rje pha bong, byang mi 'gyurgyi dung dkar rung byon.
477



County Seat
District Seat
Township Seat
Administrative Village
Monastery
Ei
County Border
Township Border
River
Road
Payaga River
1/450,000
Phyag-ru
à Khug-chags
(dBa'-zhabs
xdGurdza
Phyag
Mo-rin
rTa'u
County
bSam-grub
Lung-bstan
Grong-gnyisa
Chu-mig
Rong-brag County
Brag-thoge
26 'Dra-ba
Dampatang-grol
-Ba-smad
Ser-kha
-
chu
d a
Nyag-rong County
Nyag chu County
Phyag-ru
Lha-sgang
Dar-rtse-mdo County
478



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(161) bSam grub Monastery
(163) dGu rdza Monastery
479



(164) Dam pa rang grol Monastery
480



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
Nyag chu county
Nyag chu is the name of a river which takes its source in Khri 'du county,
Yul shul Prefecture, Qinghai Province. It flows through gSershul county before
entering dKar mdzes Prefecture where it joins the 'Bri chu (Yangtze). The total
length of Nyag chu river is over 1500 km. In Tibetan, the river in its upper reaches
is known as Dza chu, and in its lower reaches as Nyag chu. Nyag chu county
(Chinese Yajiang) is located in dar mdzes Prefeture, Sichuan Province. The county
is located around the middle reaches of Nyag chu river. The county covers an area
of 7,681.5 sq km. There are 79 villages divided between 17 townships. The seat of
Nyag chu county is sPun zla grong (latitude: 30°02'N, and longitude: 101°00'E;
altitude: 2,632 m) 147 km from Dartsemdo, the capital of dKar mdzes Prefecture.
(165) 'Du ra Monastery
1. Name
Du ra Monastery was formerly known as g Yung drung gsang phug or dPal
gshen du ra.' It belongs to rВa smyug rong township.
2. Location
The monastery is located 109 km south of sPun zla grong, the seat of Nyag chu
county.
3. History
The monastery seems to have been founded by 'Gro mgon Gyal ba tshul
khrims in the Water-Rat year before the first Rab byung (1012). According to
legend, it was one of the thirty-seven 'Du gnas, "gathering places", during the
period of sTag ri gnyan gzigs, the thirty-first king of the IDe dynasty in Yarlung.
Then a master known as dGe legs rnam rgyal alias mKha''gying ram nag from
Gyal rong renamed the sacred site gYung drung gsang phug. It is also known dPal
gShen bstan Idum ra. His successors were Khro rgyal rtse, IDe nag khyung gsas
dbal bon (the latter founded a nunnery called 'Og min dga'Idan that produced
several reputed female practitioners), rMa Ha rgod, Yab zin bon ston, and finally
Khod po Blo gros thogs med (1280-1337) who rebuilt the monastery at the age of
sixty-seven. He was succeeded by Shes rab rgyal mtshan, 'Gro mgon Klong rol
dbang rgyal, but it is not certain whether the latter was a direct descendant of the
former. Then, according to the Mi nyag Idum radgon byung ishul, the following
masters in the succession were:
1. dBang bsgyur bstan pa rgyal mtshan
2. IHun grub dbang rgyal
481



3. Rin chen rgyal mtshan
4. Blo gsal g-yung drung dbang Idan
5. sKyabs mgon Byin pa rgyal mtshan
6. m Tshungs med sMon lam lhun grub
7. Togs ldan rGyal ba gtsug phud
8. Grub chen bsTan pa 'brug grags
9.gDeng thog bSod nams dbang rgyal
10. Gom chen Tshe dbang g-yung drung
11. Tsal rdzogs rNam rgyal gtsug phud
12. rNam mkhyen Kun dga' lhun grub
13. mKhyen brtse IHun grub dpal bzang
14.rNam dag Gyal ba gtsug phud
15. Shes rab seng ge
16. Shes rab dbang Idan
17. Gyal ba tshul khrims
18. bsTan pa 'brug grags
19. gYung drung phun tshogs
20. gYung drung smon lam
21. Blo gros dpal Idan
22. gYung drung nyi ma
23. gYung drung rgyal mtshan
At some point the monastery was destroyed in a skirmish and was rebuilt
by Gyal ba gtsug phud, the 14th. The monastery was again destroyed during the
Cultural Revolution and was rebuilt in the 1980s.
4. Hierarchical system
- one mkhan po
- two dbu mdzad (one dbu mdzad che ba and one chung ba)
- one dge skos
- two phyag mdzod
- two mchod dpon (one mchod dpon and one mchod g-yog)
- one mgon khang bla ma
All the incumbents are replaced every three years with the exception of the
mkhan po.
5. Current number of monks
There are twenty-seven novices and monks in the monastery.
6. Current education
There are language and religious teachings for the young novices, and the mgon
482



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
khang bla ma is the teacher.
7. Educational exchange
In the past the monks went to sMan ri Monastery (No. 1). They now also go to
Shar rdza Hermitage (No. 138) for their ordination vows.
8/9. Rituals
- 1st month: commemoration of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan for ten
days from the 5th day
- 4th month: a ritual to provoke rainfall and prevent hail storms for five days
from the 15th day
- 5th month: dbyar mchod for thirteen days from the 13th day
- 9th month: dgun mchod from the 18th day for fifteen days, ending with the
dgu gtor rite and the 'cham dances: dBal gsas tshogs 'cham, dMu bdud zhal
'cham, dPal Idan lha mo, 'Dod yon lha mo, sTag la'i rnga 'cham, gShen rab
dgu 'cham, gSer skyems, rNam brgyad, Mon pa, dMag dpon, Sha ba, Dur
khrod and dGe slong
10. Books held in the monasery
The monastery has a copy of the new edition of Kanjur in 165 volumes and a
printed copy of the collected works of Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan, and various
ritual texts.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery depends on offerings from the faithful. The monks provide their
own food.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of five communities (shog khag): Tsher
ma rong, 'Brog pa, Rong pad 'dzin, Rag gong and Ma ti shod. Tsher ma rong
community comprises four villages: Tsho cha with forty-three families, Bar rdza
with fifteen families, gNas zhal with seventeen families and rTa ba with twenty
families. "Brog pa community comprises three villages: Pad 'dzin with nine families,
IHa g-yag with three families and Guru with seventeen families.
Rong pad 'dzin community comprises four villages: Pad 'dzin with three
families, Rong pa with four families, m Tsho thog with thirty-two families and Mi
nyi shod with twenty-one famileis. Rag gong communities comprises two villages:
Rag gong with twenty-six families and Li'gu with thirty-six families. Ma ti shod
communities comprises three villages: stod pa with nine families, Bar ma with
seven families and sMad pa with sixteen families.
483



13. Local festivals
The mountain behind the monastery is called Seng ge dkar mo and is regarded
as the abode of the local eponymous deity. There is a la btsas at the top of the
mountain which is renewed on the 15th and 25th days of the 5th month by the
monks and on the 3rd day of the 1st month by the lay people.
14. Occupation of the local population
Farmers with the exception of 'Brog pa shog khag who are nomads
Sources
(1) Interviews with the following monks at the monastery in autumn 1997: Nyi ma
bstan'dzin (b.1968), a monk and the present mkhan po of the monastery, g Yung
drung nor bu (b.1970), g Yung drung rnam dag (b.1930), bSod nams blo gros
(b.1972), Shes rab 'od zer (b.1974)
(2) Texts:
- Mi nyag Idum radgon byung tshul, anonymous, MS
- Mi nyag 'du ra dgon pa'i lo rgyus by Rig 'dzin bstan srung, MS
. Chi med 'gro 'dul Khod spungs Blo gros thogs med kyi skyes rabs dang 'brel
ba'i don gyi rnam thar gdung rabs dang bcas pa rdzogs ldan springvi rol mo
by dBra ston skal bzang bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan (1897-1959) (xylographic
edition)
Notes
1 There is a short history of the monastery entitled Mi nyag Idum radgon byung tshul (MS)
by an unknown author who writes first IDum radgon and then 'Du radgon, but the monks
in the monastery have affirmed that 'Du ra is the correct name of the monastery
2 Mi nyag 'du radgon pa'i lo rgyus by Rig 'dzin bstan srung. MS., p.1
3 Minyag ldum radgon byung Ishul, MS., p.1.
4 According to Minyag Idum ra dgon byung tshul (pp.6-7) he built IDum ra Monastery at
the age of sixty-seven and that he died at the age of seventy-seven in 'Du ra Monastery,
but according to Khod po Blo gros thogs med he died in 1337 at the age of fifty-eight.



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(166) Thang sgang Monastery
1. Name
The full name of Thang sgang Monastery is Thang sgang g-yung drung nags
tshal gling.
2. Location
The monastery is located 49 km south of the county town of the Nyag chu
County, of which 40 km for car and the rest 9 km there is no road for car, one has to
go on foot for about 5 hours.
3. History
There is a text entitled Thang sgang dgon pa'i lo rgyus by Rig 'dzin bstan
srung. It is about history of the monastery and written very recently. The author
states that the monastery was founded by g Yung drung rgyal mtshan in the Wood-pig
Year of the tenth Rab byung (1575). The following names of the masters are still
remembered by the old monks in the monastery
1. gYung drung rgyal mtshan
2. gYung drung Ihun grub
3. gYung drung smon lam
4. gYung drung bstan'dzin
5. A 'bi bla ma
6. Shes rab tshul khrims
7. Tshul khrims bstan'dzin. It was rebuilt in the 1980s.
4. Hierarchical system:
- one bla ma
- one dbu mdzad
- one dge skos
- one phyag mdzod
- one mchod dpon
They appointment is changed every three years. The present bla ma of the
monastery is Tshul khrims bstan'dzin.
5. Current number of monks
There are fourteen monks in the monastery.
6/7. Current education and exchange
There are courses for language and teachings for the young monks in the
monastery. The monastery has very close relationship with Ye shes Monastery
485



(No. 150) in Nyag rong.
8/9. Rituals
This monastery has re-established the performance of the ritual dbyar mchod
and dgun mchod. The dbyar mchod takes place from the 1st to 30th of the 1st month,
and the dgun mchod from the 20th to 30th of the 12th month.
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has a set of the Bonpo Kanjur of the 1985-1988 edition as well
as copies of the collected works of the following masters: Nyam med Shes rab
rgyal mtshan, Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan, dBra ston bskal bzang bstan pa'i
rgyal mtshan. There is also a copy of the Khams chen.
11. Income and expenses
Monks in the monastery have to provide their food and the expenses of the
monastery depend on offerings of followers.
12. Local community
There is only one village called Thang sgang with 40 families.
13. Local festivals
The mountain behind the monastery is called sPang ser. There is a lake called
Pang ser g-yu mtsho sngon mo situated up in the mountains and is regarded as the
abode of the local deity by the same name. The la brsas for the deity is on bank of
the lake and the deity is propitiated on the first of the 1st month and the 6th of the
4th month of the Tibetan calendar.
14. Occupation of the local people
Agriculture
Sources
(1) Interview in autumn of 1997 with: Blo bzang ye shes (b.1967), a monk in the
monastery
(2) Text:
- Thang sgang dgon pa'i lo rgyus by Rig 'dzin bstan srung, MS



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
Chu-kha
Nyag
sPun-zla-grong
- Chu County
Thang 'lor
Grong-gsum
Khrims-'dzam
Mig-nor
- Rlung-gdong
Mar-ru-mtshoo
"Durtal
Dar-rtse-mdo County
Dar-rang
Do-lo-sgang V.:/
Thang-8gang
Nas-mgo La-thog
Wa-skalung pa
sher-ma-roup
County Seat
mGo-dkar
District Seat
Township Seat
Administrative Village
Monastery
Mountain
County Border
Township Border
River
Li-thang County
Road
Footpath
1/510,000
487



(165) 'Du ra Monastery
488



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
Li thang County
Li thang county is located east of Sa blu li mountain, around the upper and
middle reaches of Li chu river, a tributary of Nyag chu river, in southwest Kar
mdzes Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture, Sichuan Province. The county covers an
area of 15337 sq km; there are 114 villages divided between 26 townships. The
county seat is located at mKhar mthon po (Gao cheng) (latitude: 29°59'N, longitude:
100°16'E, altitude: 4,187m), 284 km from Dartsemdo, the capital of Kar mdzes
Prefecture.
(167) 'Gro mgon Monastery
1. Name
The full name of the monastery is 'Gro mgong-yung drung bdud 'dul gling,
2. Location
The monastery is located 86 km north of Li thang, the county seat.
3. History
The founder of the monastery is believed to be 'Gro mgon bDud tsi rgyal
mtshan who was born into the 'Gro mgon family of dBra village in Bu 'bor sgang
in the bZhag area in Khams. He founded the monastery at the age of twenty-two.
He took his monastic vows from 'Gro mgon gYor med at the age of twenty-five and
received the name bDud rtsi rgyal mtshan. He passed away at the age of fifty-eight.
His successor was his nephew 'Azha Blo gros rgyal mtshan (1198-1263), who was
ordained at the age of twenty-eight by bDud rtsi rgyal mtshan, his uncle. He died at
the age of sixty-three.
Mu po provides a list of the following masters in his 'Gro mgon g.yung drung
bdud 'dul gling:
1. mKhas grub 'Dul ba rgyal mtshan
2. dBang gi rgyal po
3. bs Tan pa rgyal mtshan
4. IHun grub dbang rgyal
5. Rin chen 'od zer
6. gYung drung dbang dan
7. sByin pa rgyal mtshan
8. Mon lam Ihun grub
9. Gyal ba gtsug phud
10. Grub chen 'Brug grags
11. bSod nams dbang rgyal
489



12. Tshe dbang g-yung drung
13. Nam rgyal gtsug phud
14. Kun dga' lhun grub
15. Sod nams rgyal mtshan
16. Hun grub dpal bzang
17. Gyal ba gtsug phud
18. Shes rab seng ge
19. Gyal ba tshul khrims
20. bsTan pa 'brug grags
21. gYung drung phun tshogs
22. Gar dbang rdo rje
23. gYung drung smon lam
24. Blo gros dbang ldan
25. gYung drung nyi ma
26. Shes rab blo gros
27. gYung drung rgyal mtshan
28. bskal bzang bstan rgyas
gSang sngags gling pa(1864-?) and Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan
(1858-1934) and dBra ston bsKal bzang bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan (1897-1959) visited
the monastery to give teachings. The monastery was razed during the Cultural
Revolution and rebuilt in 1991. The present master of the monastery is 'Chi med
ram rgyal (b. 1989)
4. Hierarchical system
- one dgon bdag
- one mkhan po
- one dbu mdzad (replaced every year)
- one dge skos (replaced every year)
- one mchod g-yog (replaced every year)
- one spyi ba (replaced every year)
5. Current number of monks
There are fifty-three novices and monks in the monastery.
6. Current education
There are no organized classes. The young novices are trained by the elder
monks.
7. Educational exchange
The monks go to Manri Monastery (No.1) and Shar rdza Hermitage (No.138)
490



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
to take their ordination vows and for further teachings.
8/9. Rituals
- Ist month: the ritual known as Kyil 'khor zhi sgrub based on the Bla ma sku
gsum gyi drag phur dkyil 'khor by gSang sngags gling pa from the 1st day for
seven days
- 4th month Sidhi recitation for seven days
recitation of Kanjur from the 15th day of the 5th month to the 15th day of the
6th month the dbyar gnas fasting from the 15th day of the 6th month to 30th
day of the 7th month
- 9th month: Tag la with the dgu gtor rite from the 22nd day to the end of the
month
- 11th month: the ritual cycles of Khro bo and Phur pa from the 22nd day for
seven days
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has a copy of the printed copy of Kanjur; printed copies of the
collected works of the following masters: mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan, Shar
rdza bra shis rgyal mtshan, dBra ston bsKal bzang bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan and bDe
chen gling pa.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery depends on offering from its followers. The monks provide their
own food.
12. Local community
The local lay community of the monastery consists of four comunities (shog
khag) in the area: Jo bo, Mar shod, Yar shod and 'Bo ba. Jo bo community
comprises eight villages: Ba kha with eight families, Bo rig with one family, Bu lo
with seven families, 'Bar la with four families, Khyer ba with seven families, gZi
lung with three families, gNam gsas with six families and Ya dar with five families;
Mar shod community comprises one village A rje which has only one Bonpo family;
Yar shod community comprises one village A rje which has only Bonpo family: 'Bo
ba community comprises one village Shing las which has only one Bonpo family,
13. Local festivals
The mountain behind the monastery is called g Yung drung Ihartsa and is
regarded as the abode of the local deity of the same name and has a la brsas at its
summit which is renewed on the 13th day of the 4th month.
There is a sacred site called Dran pa zhi khro gnas. It is located 1 km northwest
491



of the monastery and was sanctified by gSang sngags gling pa. It is worshipped
every Dog Year by both monastic and lay communities together. There is another
sacred mountain called sNa brag dkar, located four hours on horseback north of
the monastery, worshipped by both Bonpos and Buddhists following the Buddhist
tradition, every Horse Year.on the 15th day of the 1st month.
14. Occupation of the local people
Farmers
Sources
(1) Interviews with the following monks at the monastery in autumn 1997: g Yung
drung rgyal mtshan (b.1958), Padma (b.1958), Blo gros (b.1978)
(2) Texts:
- IHo 'gro mgon gyi lo rgyud (rgyus) udpali phreng mdzes rjes 'brang blo gsal
gyi mgul rgyan, anonymous, MS
- 'Gro mgon g-yung drung bdud 'dul gling by Mu po, MS R
Notes
1 According to 'Gro mgon gYung drung bdud 'dul gling by Mu po, MS.p.4., he was born
in a Iron-Dragon Year called Nam gnon (620 A.D.), but then goes on to say that 'A zha
Blogros rgyal mtshan, 'Gro mgon bDud rtsi rgyal mtshan's nephew, was born in 624 A.D.
This is obviously incorrect since we know that Azha Blo gros rgyal mtshan was an abbot
of gYas ru dben sa Monastery in g Tsang. Therefore bDud rtsi rgyal mtshan cannot have
lived in the 11th century,
2 It is obvious that Mu po copied this list from Ho 'gro mgon gyi lo rgyud (rgyus) utpla
phreng mdzes rjes 'brang blo gsal gyi mgul rgyan; he claims that there were one
hundred and thirteen masters in the succession of 'Gro mgon. Furthermore, the text was
undoubtedly written in the 20th century since it mentions several personages such as dBra
ston bskal bzang bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan (1897-1959).
492



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
dPal-yul County
Nyag-rong County
'Bo-på
Yar-shog
'Gro-mgona
To-bo
'Baº-thang County
Nyag-chu.County
Li-thang
mChod-rten
Li - thang County
County Seat
Byang-pa
District Seat
Township Seat
Administrative Village
Monastery
Mountain
County Border
Township Border
River
Road
Footpath
'Dab-pa County
(Dao cheng)
1/900,000
493



(167) "Gro mgon Monastery
494



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(168) Bye 'bur Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is Bye 'bur g Yung drung gling or Bye 'bur gYung
drung bde Idan gling.
2. Location
The monastery is located on the bank of the Yangtze river, 5 km southeast of
Rong brag, the county seat.
3. History
The original site of the monastery is in Sha ba mtsho near Sog po ri rtse in the
same county and the ruins of the former monastery are still visible. The monastery
was moved to its present site by a master called gDan khri for an unknown reason.
According to a legend recorded by gNyags Chos nyid rdo rje (gYung drung bde
Idan gling, Ms., p.1), in the thirteenth Rab byung (1747-1806), dGongs rtse g Yung
drung tshul khrims, who had studied at sMan ri, occupied the monastery's throne.
One night, one of his boots disappeared and was found on a dune on the bank of
the Yangtze river, dGongs rtse g Yung drung tshul khrims took this as a prophecy
and thus moved the monastery to the place where the boot was rediscovered, which
is the present site of the monastery. The monastery was therefore called Bye 'bur
dgon pa, "the dune monastery". The monastery was demolished during the Cultural
Revolution and rebuilt in the 1980s.
4. Hierarchical system
- one khri pa
- one dbu mdzad
- one dge skos
- one dkor gnyer
All the incumbents are appointed on a permanent basis as there are very few
monks in the monastery.
5. Current number of monks
There are seven monks in the monastery.
6. Current education
There are no organized classes.
7. Educational exchange
The monastery has no special ties with any other monastery and the monks may
495



go to the monastery of their choice for their ordination vows.
8/9. Rituals
Commemoration of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan for a few days at the
beginning of the 1st month; sgrub mchod in the 3rd month; g-yang sgrub in the 5th
month, smyung gnas in the 8th month.
The dates and length of the rituals mentioned above vary according to the
amount of donations received.
10. Income and expenses
The monastery depends on donations from the faithful. The monks provide
their own food.
12. Local community
The local community of the monastery consists of fifty families in Burgod
village, seventy-two families in sGang 'bur village and forty-five families in Rlob
grong village.
13. Local festivals
The mountain behind the monastery is called gSum zer and is the residence of
the local deity of the same name. There is a la btsas is at the top of the mountain
which is renewed on the 10th day of the 7th month.
Sources
(1) Interviews with the following monks at the monastery in autumn 1997: bs Tan
'dzin g-yung drung (b.1929), gYung drung 'chi med (b.1938), Tshul khrims
bstan 'dzin (b.1976)
(2) Texts:
-gYung drung bde ldan gling by gNyags Chos nyid rdo rje, MS
(169) sPang gi lung Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full is sPang gi lung bDe Idan nor bu gling. The name is also
written as Phu gu lung (gNyags Chos nyid rdo rje, Nor bu bde Idan gling) and 'Bur
gu rlung.
2. Location
The monastery is located on the ridge of a small mountain range, 2 km east of
496



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
Rong brag, the county seat.
3. History
According to a legend recorded by gNyag Chos nyid rdo rje, there existed a
monastery with about seventy monks at sPang nang in Sog po stag bsan in which
both Bonpo and Buddhists practised together for decades, but owing to its remote
location, the monastery was moved in the 15th Rab byung (1867-1926) to a site
called "Gu ya and its master was a Nyi ma rgyal mtshan. Grub thob gYung drung nyi
ma, one of its masters, again moved the monastery to Bur gu rlung in the Wood-Bird
year of the 16th Rab byung (1945) and renamed it sPro snang Grub thob Bla brang.
From then onwards the monastery became known as bDe Idan nor bu gling. The
monastery was knocked down during the Cultural Revolution and rebuilt in 1983 at
the same site.
4. Hierarchical system
- one khri pa
- one dbu mdzad
- one dge skos
- one dkor gnyer
The terms of office are not fixed.
5. Current number of monks
There are seventeen novices and monks in the monastery.
6. Current education
There are no organized classes. The young novices are trained by the elder
monks.
7. Educational exchange
The monastery has no special ties with any other establishment, and the monks
are free to go to the monastery of their choice (generally Shar rdza Hermitage,
No.138) for ordination and further teachings.
8/9. Rituals
Commemoration of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan for a few days at the
beginning of the 1st month; sgrub mchod in the 3rd month; g-yang sgrub in the 5th
month, smyung gnas fast in the 8th month.
The dates and length of the rituals mentioned above vary according to the
amount of donations received from the monastery's followers.
497



10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has no library. The monks have their own books for ritual
purposes.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery depends on offerings from its followers. The monks provide
their own food.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of three villages: Tsog bu with forty-six
families, Bar so with forty-one families and La ba with sixty-one families.
14. Economic occupation of the local people
Farmers
Sources
(1) Interview in autumn of 1997 with g Yung drung rab rgyas, a monk at the
monastery who is around twenty-five years old.
(2) Texts:
- Nor bu bde ldan gling by gNyags Chos nyid rdo rje. MS
(170) gYung drung dar rgyas Monastery
1. Name
The monastery is usually known as Brag steng gYung drung dar rgyas gling.
2. Location
The monastery is located on the bank of Yongtze river 27 km south of the
county town of Rong brag.
3. History
A precise date of foundation of the monastery is not known, but it is said to
have been founded by Sangs rgyas gling pa acccording to gNyags Chos nyid rdo
rje (g Yung drung dar rgyas gling, MS p.1). Sangs rgyas gling pa is one of the four
masters of the New Bon Tradition and a famous gter ston. The same source also
suggests that the monastery was founded prior to the destruction of gYung drung Ita
steng Monastery (No. 187). The monastery had the Brag steng king as its benefactor
and the king was an ardent supporter of g Yung drung Ita steng which was destroyed
by Qianlong in 1776. Because of this reason, monks of the monastery were forced
498



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
to leave the monastery and live in the villages. They had later several monasteries
built, for example, Shan co,2 Zhi ba sa le and Mu chu la rgod.
The monastery produced several famous masters, such as Tu phyag Phyogs las
ram rgyal who was born in Je lung valley which is five kilometers northeast of the
monastery and m Tshams pa dge bshes (his real name is unknown) was born in She
co valley, but there is very little information about theses masters.
In 1940 the monastery was moved and rebuilt by rGyal sprul, a master from
Brag 'go and Nyi ma dbang Idan, the king of Brag steng at the present site. It was
active until the middle of the twentieth century. It again suffered from destruction
and was rebuilt by Nya ngo Tshul khrims and Ye shes with the financial help given
by bs Tan pa dbang rgyal who was a former monk of the monastery and now a
business man living in Lhasa.
4. Hierarchical system:
- one khri pa
- one dbu mdzad
- one dge skos
- one dkor gnyer
These are appointed on a permanent basis as there are very few monks in the
monastery.
5. Current number of monks
There are seven monks in the monastery.
6. Current education
There are no organized classes, the younger monks are trained by the elder
monks.
7. Educational exchange
The monastery has no special ties with any other monastery. The monks may go
to the monastery of their choice for their ordination.
8/9. Rituals
- 1st month: commemoration of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan from the
4th to 5th; commemoration of gShen rab Mi bo from the 14th to 15th
- 3rd month: performance of the ritual cycle of Phur pa from the 1st to 15th
with the 'cham dances: gShen rab dgu 'cham, Phur 'cham, Me ri'i 'cham,
Gyad bzhi and Bla ma bon skor
- 4th month: observance of the smyungs gnas fast, from the 14th to 15th
- 7th month: the performance of the bsang ceremony on Mount Gyal mo dmu
499



rdo on the 10th
S
reet
11. Income and expenses
The monastery depends on donations from the faithful; the monks provide their
own food.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of ten villages: Mi log village with forty
families, She co with thirty-three families, Seri with twenty-three families in She
co valley; Pher with fifty-eight families, A la pe with forty-two families, Bram
with thirty families, Ma ni ra kho with thirty five families, 'Gi ru with twenty-one
families in Yag re village, Shan sde with eighty-five families, Le dom with ten
families in Lang 'ge village.
13. Local festivals
The mountain behind the monastery is called bDud kyi zer ba and is regarded
as the abode of the local deity called Khyung zhig. There is a la bisas situated at the
top of the mountain and renewed only by the monks of the monastery. There is no
fixed date for this ceremony.
Sources
(1) Interview in autumn of 1997 with the following monks of the monastery: Tshul
khrims mam dag (b.1928), Tshul khrims ye shes (b.1939), Tshul khrims blo gros
(b.1935) and bs Tan 'dzin rin chen (b.1915).
(2) Texts:
-gYung drung dar rgyas gling by gNyag Chos nyid rdo rje. MS
Notes
I gYung drung Iha steng Monastery was one of the most important Bonpo monasteries in
Gyal rong. It was destroyed by the Manchu army of Qianlong emperor in 1776 in the
second war of Gyal rong. g Yung drung Iha steng Monastery was forcefully converted to
the dGe lungs pa sect of Tibetan Buddhism and was given a Chinese name: Guangfasi.
Some times it is also called Yongzhong lama si ( Yung drung bla ma Monastery). See
Jiarong Zangzu Shizhi (History of Tibetans in Gyal rong) by Qiaodan (mChod rten),
p.361-364. Mi rigs dpe skrun khang, 1995. Beijing.
2 Shan co gtsug lag khang, Shan co is a valley which is located fifteen kilometers northeast
of the the monastery.
3 Zhi ba sa le Monastery was located in Ma le kha kha co valley of today's Chu chen
County of rNga pa Prefecture.
4 Mu chu la rgod Monastery was located in 'O lung valley of today's Wen chuan County of
Nga pa Prefecture.
500



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(171) Khyung lung Monatery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is Khyung lung rnam rgyal Iha rtse ri khrod or
Khyung lung gShen bstan rnam rgyal lha rtse gling. It is also known as Khyung
dgon.
2. Location
The monastery is located on a mountain 30 km north of Rong brag, the county
seat, about one and a half hours' walk from the main road.
3. Histroy
Bla ma A lco from Khyung po came to Brag steng where he lived in a cave as
a hermit and gave teachings. Later he was made the chief of Brag steng area. From
that time onwards, the eldest son in the Khyung po family inherited the position
of king, while the younger son that of master of the monastery. According to dKa'
thub, the monastery was founded in the Fire-Ox year of the 5th Rab byung (1277).
The cave, where the original hermitage was established, was known as Khyung lung
mam rgyal lha rtse and later when it was expanded into a monastery, as gShen bstan
mam rgyal lha rtse gling.
The monastery survived until the Cultural Revolution, dKa'thub provides a list
of the monastery's succession of its masters, but since the author himself doubts its
authenticity, I have not reproduced it here.
4. Hierarchical system
With the exception of bsTan 'dzin ren chen, the head of the monastery, there are
no other positions.
5. Current number of monks
There are only six monks in the monastery.
6. Current education
The monastery no longer has a proper educational system. The young novices
are trained by the elder monks.
7. Educational exchange
The monastery used to send its monks to sMan ri Monastery (No.1) for
teachings and ordination.
501



8/9. Rituals
The monastery has not yet resumed its annual ritual activities.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery depends on donations from the faithful.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of two villages: 'Gu nge and Lung khug, with
a total of about one hundred families.
13. Local festivals
There is a mountain called Bri we located one day's walk west of the county
seat, which is believed to be a goddess called Bri we Pad ma bu khrid. There is an
image of her in g Yung drung dar rgyas Monastery (No.170). She is regarded as a
daughter of A myes Ma chen. The mountain was designated as a gnas ri by gSang
sngags gling pa.
14. Occupation of the local people
Farmers
Sources
(1) Interview in autumn 1997 with bsTan 'dzin ren chen (b.1927), a monk at the
monastery
(2) Texts:
- Khyung lung dgon by dKa' thub, MS
(172) rJi ngo Monastery
1. Name
The monastery is also known as 'Jam dbyangs khang.
3. History
Ji ngo Monastery is said to be very ancient, and to have been founded more
than a thousand years ago, but so far no evidence in support of this claim has been
found. According to legend, it started out as a hermitage and was transformed into a
monastery in the 14th century. The religious masters of Khro skyabs, Brag steng and
rTa'u visited the monastery at different times. A master from Khro skyabs is said to
have enlarged the monastery. It was razed during the Cultural Revolution and was
rebuilt by a group of thirty people from the local village in 1985.
502



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
5. Current number of monks
There are no monks in the monastery.
8/9. Rituals
The villagers gather at the monastery two days a month to observe the smyung
gnas fast.
12. Local community
There are one hundred families in the brGya 'dres village.
13. Local festivals
There is a la btsas on Bo ri, the mountain behind the monastery, which is
propitiated on the 15th day of the 4th month. Kha ba ston stan, another sacred
mountain, (gnas ri) located behind Bori, is propitiated on the same date.
14. Economic occupation of the local people
Farmers
Sources
(1) Interviews in autumn 1997 with: 'Bum thar (b.1934), a lay tantric practitioner
of the village, skal bzang nor bu (b.1930), a farmer of the village, Gya mtsho
(b.1934), a lay tantric practitioner of the village, Nam mkha Ardo (b.1933), a
farmer in the village, gYung drung (b.1948), a villager who works in the local
government at the county seat.
(173) dPag bsam lhun 'grub Monastery
1. Name
The monastery is also known as sBal lung dgon, after the name of the site.
2. Location
The monastery is located 78 km northwest of Rong brag, the county seat.
3. History
The name of the founder is given as sku zhabs Dam pa by gNyag chos nyid rdo
rje, but it is obviously not a real name.
He also states that the monastery was founded in the Earth-Ox year of the 12th
Rab byung (1709), sku zhabs Dam pa was succeeded by Nyi ma, who had three
reincarnations, mGal bu sku zhabs, Kong yul sku zhabs and Amgal sku zhabs. mGal
503



bu succeeded him as the abbot of the monastery but left shortly after for mDo bzhi
mo Monastery. The monastery was burned down in the Fire-Dragon year of the 15th
Rab byung (1916) during a skirmish. It was later restored by a lama called Tshe
dbang. The latter's reincarnation was Tshe dbang sku chung alias mDo lo sprul sku
who died in the middle of the 20th century. The present head of the monastery is
dGaba bkra shis (b.1943) and the khri pa is bsTan pa'i rgyal mtshan.
4. Hierarchical system
- one khri pa
- one dbu mdzad
- one dge skos
- one mchod g-yog
- one 'cham dpon
All the incumbents are replaced every three years with the exception of the khri
pa.
5. Current number of monks
There are ten novices and monks in the monastery.
6. Current education
There are no organized classes. The young novices are trained by the elder
monks.
7. Educational exchange
The monastery is a branch of gZhun ring Monastery (No.160) and its chanting
and "cham tradition follow that of gZhung ring.
8/9. Rituals
The smon lam prayer from the 7th to the 19th day of the 1st month; the smyung
gnas fasting from the 10th to the 18th day of the 4th month; rNam rgyal stong
mchod for seven days in the 7th month.
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has a printed copy of Kanjur, Nam mkha' bstan'dzin's edition.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery depends on donations from its followers.
12. Local community
The local lay community of the monastery consists of eight villages: 'O
504



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
mkhyen with twenty-five families, 'Bri no with ten families, Ra sde with fifteen
families, Ra zur with twelve families, mDa' mdo with twenty-four families, sBal
lung with six families, Gon cha with six families and Tsha nyal with eighteen
families.
13. Local festivals
The mountain behind the monastery, sBal lung gdong, is the abode of the local
deity sku bla dВal drel and is propitiated on the 13th day of the 5th month. There is
a la btsas at the top known by the same name.
There is a sacred mountain (gnas ri) called Rin chen spungs pa about 2 km
from the monastery that was designated as such by A khu Tshe dbang, a master of
gZhung ring Monastery. The Seng chen hermitage is an hour's walk west of the
monastery
14. Occupation of the local people
Farmers
Sources
(1) Interview in autumn in 1997 with dGa' ba bkra shis (b.1943), head of the
monastery
(2) Texts:
- dPag bsam lhun 'grub gling by gNyags Chos nyid rdo rje, MS
(174) Do zur mo Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is Do zur mo (or bzhi mo) 'Dod rgu phun tshogs
gling.
2. Location
The monastery is located 42 km from Rong brag, the county seat.
3. History
The monastery was founded by Nang so g Yung drung bstan'dzin in the
Wood-Monkey year of the 12th Rab byung (1714) for the five villages of Gyal
shod. The following masters of the monastery, Bla ma Tshe dbang grags pa, sku
zhabs Dam pa, Bla marGyal ba, gZhi ring A khu Tshe dbang, Ye shes tshe dbang,
Bla ma gZhan phan and gYung drung blo gsal became famous throughout the
region, but since the monastery was a branch of sBal lung Monastery, they are
505



generally associated with the latter. The monastery was destroyed in a dispute in the
early 20th century. It was burned down again in 1935. The monastery was restored
owing to mGal bu's efforts. It was again demolished during the Cultural Revolution
and was rebuilt in the 1980s.
4. Hierarchical system
- one dbu mdzad
- one dge skos
- one mchod dpon
In theory, all the incumbents, with the exception of the dgon bdag, are replaced
every three years, but in practice they remain in office for longer periods owing to
the small number of monks.
5. Current number of monks
There are twenty-five novices and monks in the monastery.
6. Current education
There are no organized classes. The young monks are trained by the elder
monks.
7. Educational Exchange
The monastery is a branch of sBal lung Monastery and in the past there were
educational exchanges between the two.
8/9. Rituals
The monastery no longer holds regular annual rituals.
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has a printed copy of the Kanjur, Nam mkha' bstan 'dzin's
edition.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery depends on offerings from its followers.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of seven villages: Bya grong ba with
fifty-eight families, skor dgu with forty-five families, Ri ma with forty-eight
families, Zla khog with thirty-two families, gzi cha with thirteen families, Mo tsi
with forty families and Ri ba with twenty families.
506



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
13. Local festivals
The mountain behind the monastery is called dBang 'dul sdud and is the abode
the local deity dBal drel. The deity is propitiated by the monastery together with
dPag bsam lhun 'grub gling Monastery, on the 15th day of the 1st month and the
15th day of the 12th month.
There is also a sacred mountain (gans rí) called Brag dben gnas 2 km northwest
of the monastery and worshipped on the same dates as the above-mentioned
mountain. It is believed to have been a residence of Vairocana, the famous Tibetan
Buddhist monk of the 8th century.
14. Occupation of the local people
Farmers
Sources
(1) Interviews with the following monks at the monastery in autumn 1997: gYung
durng bstan'dzin (b.1937), A 'dzin (b.1927), Shes rab Ye shes (b.1926)
(2) Texts:
- Dod dgu phun tshogs gling by gNyag Chos nyid rdo rje, MS
(175) Bya ti lo Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is Bya ti lo g Yung drung bde chen gling. It is also
called INga stag bDe chen gling, Bya ti lo is a place name where the monastery is
located.
It is also written as bCa'rdo lo in the gYung drung bde chen gling by gNyag
Chos nyid rdo rje, MS.
2. Location
The monastery is located 15 km from the county town.
3. Histroy
Before the present monastery was founded, there were two Bonpo monasteries
called IHo nub and Nas rdzong, the former belonged to INga shog community, and
the latter Tag gsum village. Then, A'ga'sku zhabs, the reincarnation of su zhabs
Nyi ma, a native of the Bajo village, founded Bya ti lo Monastery in 1859 which
then became common for both INga shog and sTag gsum villages.
g Yung drung thogs med nyi ma, the reincarnation of A 'ga'sku zhabs, was
born in Tsha family of the stag gsum village. He was recognized as a reincarnation
507



by gZhi ris Nam mkha' bsam "grub. Soon after the death of A 'ga'sku zhabs, the
monastery was burnt down. The next reincarnation rebuilt it in a new place and it
existed until it was finally destroyed during the Cultural Revolution. The present
monastery was rebuilt in the 1980s. gYung drung blo gsal, the third successor of sku
zhabs Nyi ma, is the present master of the monastery.
4. Hierarchical system:
- one khri pa
s
- one dbu mdzad
- one dge skos
- one gnyer pa
Only the dge bskos is replaced each year, but the rest stays permanent.
5. Current number of monks
There are thirteen monks in the monastery.
6. Current education
The young monks follow older monks for teachings. No courses are given to
the young monks.
7. Educational exchange
Since the monastery's masters came from Bal lung Monastery at the
beginning, it often sends the young monks there as well as sending them to sMan ri
Monastery (No. 1) in order to receive their ordination.
8/9. Rituals
- 1st month: performance of the ritual cycles of Phur nga and Zhi khro for five
days
- 6th month: ritual of Zhi khro for four days
- 7th month: ritual of rNam rgyal for three days
- 10th month: ritual of Phur nag for four days
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has a copies of the 'Bum nyi ma dgu shar and the Dri med gzi
brjid from the A yung edition.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery depends on offerings of its followers in the villages.
508



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
12. Local community
There are nine villages: Do ba village with forty families, Thog ba with fifty
families, Zhabs tsho ba with fifty families, Ba zog with fifty families, Tho byi with
twenty-three families, Ci ru with forty families, Wa ba with sixty families, sTag
gsum with sixty families and Le lu with forty families.
13. Local festivals
The back mountain behind the monastery is called Ra ma Bla ri, regarded as the
abode of the local deity called gYung drung dgra'dul.
14. Occupation of the local people
Agriculture
Sources
(1) Interview in autumn of 1997 with the following monks of the monastery:
Sri skyabs (b.1815), bs Tan pa (b.1927), Go skyabs (b.1930) and Phun pa zer
(b.1929)
(2) Texts:
-gYung drung bde chen gling by gNyag Chos nyid rdo rje, MS
509



Chu-chen County
D'
Dalmdo
de
bkod
chu
den
Brag-steng
2
4
.99
Europe Kupaligham reg-soda-pe
Do-sur-mea
Bal- ........Mogroll
Rongbrag
County
de bshes risa
Stag-gsume chudia bole
dog bshea
A
esPro-stang
rTa'u County
STag-sunro
Pasang
Bya-t-low legs legs
i do abban
Brag-mgoogle! Mar-psing
Tops
Is-abgrup-ulogas-po:
Soe-po
de
a con gray l
d isho-spang
sebar
sTong-dgupங்க
Gy-rdzong
bTsan-lha County
County Seat
District Seat
stoer daag
Township Seat
Administrative Village
hentang
Mountain
Monastery
Dar-rtse-mdo County
-
County Border
Township Border
River
Road
1/620,000
510



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(168) Bye 'bur Monastery
(169) SPang gilung Monastery
511



(170) gYung drung dar rgyas Monastery
(172) Jingo Monastery
512



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(173) dag bsam thun 'grub Monastery
(174) Do zur mo Monastery
513



(175) Bya ti lo Monastery



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal. Gansu and Sichuan
(176) Mi rgod Temple
1. Name
Ri bo lha khang
2. Location
The temple is located 8 km from the county town.
3. History
According to oral tradition, the temple was built in the Fire-Rat year of the 9th
Rab byung (1516) by La dkar bsTan pa'i rgyal mtshan' who was a monk of sMan
ri Monastery (No.1). He first took residence in a village known as De le gong and
later established a hermitage on the sacred mountain of g Nas chen Ri bo brag dkar.
The hermitage was transformed into a temple belonging to the local
community. According to legend, the cave where the hermitage was located was so
small that a yeti enlarged it, which is why the hermitage is also known as Mirgod ri
khrod, the "Yeti hermitage".
Mount Ri bo brag dkar is believed to be an abode of the goddess Srid pa rgyal
mo. The present temple was rebuilt in the 1980s. The present master of the temple is
Rig 'dzin rgya mtsho.
4. Hierarchical system
- one khri pa (replaced every five years)
- one dbu mdzad (replaced every five years)
- one dge skos (replaced every five years)
5. Current number of religious practitioners
There are fifty religious practitioners in the temple most of whom are laymen.
6. Current education
There are no organized classes.
7. Educational exchange
The temple has no particular ties with any other establishments.
8/9. Rituals
The temple does not hold any regular annual rituals.
10. Books held in the temple
The temple has no books but the practitioners have their own ritual texts.
515



11. Income and expenses
The temple depends on donations from its followers.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of five villages: De tshal with twenty
families, sDe slas with fifty three families, Ra kho with thirty-seven families, Khri
mo with one family, Lha khang with twenty-five families.
The local population is very mixed. It includes, in addition to Tibetans, many
Han and Yi followers of Bon. The temple claims that in addition to the families
mentioned above there are around two hundred families of mixed nationality in Nas
chu township, around one hundred families in Shar kha township, one hundred and
sixty families in Sa snga rong village and more than a hundred families in Kho tsha
in Mu li county.
13. Local festivals
The mountain behind the temple is Ri bo brag dkar. It has a la btsas at the top.
The local deity of the mountain is generally propitiated on the 1st, 13th and 15th
days of each month although there is no prescribed date. There are four mountains
surrounding it at the cardinal points: Dung ridkar po, gSer ridkar po, Zang brag
dmar po and Brag mar yu ring.
14. Occupation of the local people
Farmers
Source
(1) Interview with Nyi ma rgyal mtshan (b.1928) in autumn 1997, a teacher at the
temple
Notes
1 Ri bo lha khang (mirgod sgrub phug yang zer) by Do rje rig 'dzin, MS., p.1
516



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
Dar-rtse-mdo County
Thang-ngo
brGyad 4 zil County
lung
khug
hur dhe
ceod
dkar-pa
Nas-ts
Tsha-Ar
Nasiha
brGyad
County Seat
District Seat
Township Seat
Administrative Village
Monastery
County Border
Township Border
River
Road
Footpath
1/460,000
517



(176) Mirgod Temple
518



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal. Gansu and Sichuan
(177) Grib srib Monastery
Grib srib Monastery is also called sPang ri Monastery. According to oral
tradition, it was founded around in 1646. Its first bla ma was Nyi ma grags pa, born
in Gyal rong; the second was Me thar, born in 'Ben da village of Khong yul in
Dar rtse mdo; the third was born also in Gyal rong, but nobody seems to know his
name. The monastery was destroyed during the Cultural Revolution and was rebuilt
in the 1980s.
In Dar rtse mdo there are some other Bonpo temples, such as Tshe ring, 'Phong
mda' and sTag rtse, but nothing is known about them. It is the lay people who look
after them. They usually work with their families as farmers and go to the temples
only for some annual rituals. Since my visit in Dar rtse mdo was coincidence with
their harvest everybody had gone back to home for it. The only monks I met became
monks very recently. They have never been in any kind of school and have just
started to learn read and write Tibetan in that year.
519



bTsan-lha County
520
Rong-brag County
w
Po-zhin County
Khob-yul
rel-logo
rTa'u County
mdo County
e Phog-thug
Pang-phul
dBusfang
Joha-rong
Khrab-srid
Lha-sgang
USA.
Ser-len
Than-lha County
Nyag-chu County
mGo-thon
R-ske
County Seal
District Seat
S
YDžong-zhalom
-khral
par rtse-mdo.
(kangding)
O
*
Township Seat
Administrative Village
Monastery
County Border
Township Border
River
1Cags-zam County
Footpath
1/850,000



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
rNga khog
The traditional name of the region is rNga khog and its inhabitans are referred
to as Nga ba. The term rNga ba is prounced Ngawa by the people in Amdo and
transcribed by the Chinese as Aba and they wrongly use it as if it were the name of
the region, rNga ba county is located in rNga ba Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture,
Sichuan Province. There are 19 townships subdivided into 82 villages in the county
which covers an area of 10370 sq km. The population is 42,223 (of whom 37,767
were Tibetans in 1980). The county town is located at Nga ba township, 246 km
from 'Bar khams, the capital of Nga ba Prefecture, and 509 km from Chengdu, the
capital of Sichuan Province.
(178) r Togs Idan Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is rTogs Idan dBen gnas Ihun grub 'od gsal g-yung
drung gling or rTogs ldan dPal gShen bstan smin grol bkra shis g-yas su 'khyil ba'i
gling.
2. Location
The monastery is located 5 km northeast of rNga ba Township, the seat of rNga
ba county.
3. History
rTogs Idan Monastery is believed to have been an extension of a hermitage
founded by Bon blon bla ma. He was a descendent of Bya chen Nyi ma 'dzin, the
founder of sNang zhig Monastery (No.180).
The hermitage was mainly for lay practitioners and remained as such for many
generations after Bon blon bla ma. In 1666 Togs Idan gYung drung tshul khrims,
the first of the Tshul chen series, transformed it into a monastery.
Tshul khrims bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan, the second Tshul chen, received
teachings from Shar rdza bra shis rgyal mtshan (1858-1934) whom he invited to
the monastery, and changed the name of the monastery to rTogs Idan sMin grol bkra
shis g-yas su 'khyil ba'i gling. Since the monastery was destroyed in the middle of
the twentieth century it had to be rebuilt in the 1980s.
There are three main reincarnate masters as the heads of the monastery: Tshul
chen Theg mchog bstan pa'i nyi ma (b.1937), Khri pa 'Jam dbyangs mkhyen rab
rgya mtsho and Bon blon Nam mkha' bstan'dzin (b.1932). These three take turns as
khri pa of the monastery every three years.



4. Hierarchical system
- three sprul sku
- one khri pa, replaced every three years
- one mkhan po, replaced every three years
- one dbu mdzad, replaced every three years
- one dbu mkhyen, (assistant dbu mdzad) replaced every three years
- one dge skos, replaced every year
- two dge g-yog (assistant dge skos) replaced every year
- one mchod dpon, replaced every two years
- one mchod g-yog (assistant mchod dpon), replaced every two years
- two gnyer pa replaced every two years the two gnyer pa have equal status)
The incumbents are replaced on the 11th day of the 4th month following the
renewal ceremony of the la btsas dedicated to the local deity called Cho mchog
when each of the new incumbents receive a silk-knot protection (srung mdud).
5. Current number of monks
There are five hundred and eighty-eight novices and monks in the monastery.
6. Current education
There are three colleges: De snod thos bsam nyin byed gling for the study
of philosophy (mtshan nyid), IHun grub 'od gsal zla gzhon gling for the study and
practice of tantras, and INga rig shes bya'i dga' tshal gling for the study of the "five
sciences" (rig gnas Inga).
There are four hostels (khang tshan): Kun rig khang tshan, Dus 'khor khang
tshan, sMan lha khang tshan and Byams Idan khang tshan.
7. Educational exchange
Togs Idan is the largest monastery upholding the New Bon Tradition. Many
monk students from monasteries throughout Amdo and Khams go there to study. It
also sends teachers to smaller monasteries which have the same tradition.
8/9. Rituals
- 2nd month: ritual of the Siddhi bon sgrub that invokes Padmasambhava, from
the 23rd to the 30th day
- 3rd month: the religious service in general (zhabs rten chen mo) for the
monastery from the 1st to the 13th day
. 4th month: ritual based on the bDe chen zhing sgrub chen mo from the 11th to
the 15th day
-6th-7th months: the observance of the summer-fast (dbyar gnas chen mo)
from the 15th day of the 6th month to the 30th day of the 7th month
522



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
- 10th month: ritual based on the cycle of Phur pa called Phur sgrub chen mo
from the 5th to the 15th day
- 12th month: commemoration of a bla ma on the 20th day and the dgu gtor rite
from the 23rd to the 29th day
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has one manuscript copy of the Khams chen in sixteen
volumes) and five printed copies of the Bonpo Kanjur and Katen. It also holds
printed copies of the collected works of the following masters: rTogs Idan bSod
nams phun tshogs, rTogs Idan don mchog (in two volumes), rTogs ldan Tshul
khrims bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan in three volumes), rTogs ldan Yon tan rgya mtsho,
rTogs Idan 'Jam dbyangs mkhyen rab rgya mtsho (in three volumes), rTogs Idan
Theg mchog bstan pa'i nyi ma (in three volumes), rTogs Idan Nges don mthong
ba rang grol (in three volumes) and Togs Idan bZod pa rgyal mtshan. Most of the
books are enclosed in their traditional wooden covers (leb shing).
11. Income and expenses
The monastery depends on offerings from the faithful and also owns a hotel in
the county town.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of twenty-nine villages: sTag tsha with
thirty-families, Shod pa with thirteen families, Tsu ra with ten families, m on shul
with eight families, Khug mgo rtsa with six families, The grong with five families,
Grong mang with four families, Ka shul with twenty-eight families, 'Tsham rang
Icag with eight families, Zhe phan with four families, A ka with ten families, Ber
rtsa with six families, sNas tsa with eight families, Tha ra with eleven families,
"Gyur skor with eight families, Ho tsha with eight families, Hor 'phan with fifteen
families, Khug mgo sgang with eighteen families, Kha shu with five families, Cha
'go with one families, m Tha'ba with eighteen families, Cho mchog with ten
families, Rag tsa with eight families, Phyug tshang with thirty families, de li with
forty families, ko tsa with eight families, dGon pa with twenty families, So ri with
ten families, Byar skor ma with eight families.
13. Local festivals
The mountain behind the monastery is called Cho mchog, and has a la brsas
at its summit dedicated to the deity Cho mchog Drang srong gnyan po. As it was
constructed by rTogs Idan bSod nams phun tshogs on the 11th day of the 4th
month, the ceremony of its renewal is performed on that day by both religious and
lay communities of sNang zhig and rTogs Idan. The ceremony is followed by the



appointment of the new administrators of rTogs Idan Monastery.
14. Occupation of the local people
Farmers and traders
Sources
(1) Interviews in autumn 1998 with: Tshul chen Theg mchog bstan pa'i nyi ma, one
of the present masters of the monastery (b.1937). Bon blon Nam mkha' bstan
'dzin (b.1932), one of the three trulkus of the monastery
(2) Texts:
-rNga ba rdzong gi rtogs Idan dgon pa'i lo rgyus by Tshul chen Theg mchog
bstan pa'i nyi ma, MS
- A history of rTogs Idan monastery (untitled and anonymous), MS
- Ngang zhig bkra shis g-yung drung gling gi gdan rabs rdzogs Idan ngag gi
rgyal rnga by Bya 'phur Nam mkha'rgyal mtshan, p.38, Mutri Tsedpo Zhang
bod Research Institute, Dolanji, H.P. India, 1994
- gler bdag rbang gi bka'blon mon nam mched brgvad kyi nang ishan khyung
dkar lha gnyan gvi bsang mchod by rTogs Idan rGyal ba dbang Idan, MS
Notes
1 There are several variants of the name: Bo leb, sPo leb, Bon slebs and Bon blon.
Regarding the first variant, "bo" derives from the term bo ti in Amdo dialect, meaning
clod, leb means "flat". It is said that when Bon blon bla ma established the hermitage in
the place where there were many "flat clods": the meaning of the second variant remains
unknown; the third variant means the "arrival of Bon", the explanation for this name was
that the master was the first Bonpo to arrive in the region, the fourth variant means "the
Bon minister" which appears in the official documents given to the master by the local
authorities of Zung 'phan during the reign of Qianlong.
(179) gDong li Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is gDong li sMin grol bsam gtan dar rgyas gling.
2. Location
The monastery is located 20 km east of the county seat. The monastery lies on
a mountain ridge (which is why it is known as gDong li, gDong meaning "ridge")
between Drel lung and So mang valleys on the north bank of Nga chu river in Nga
khog.



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
3. History
The monastery was founded by bsTan pa lhun grub (1646-1779) in the Fire-Rat
year of the 12th Rab byung (1696). Following is a list of the successive masters of
the monastery:
1. bsTan pa lhun grub (1646-1779)
2. Tshul khrims rgyal mtshan (1712-1783)
3. Rin chen lhun grub (1766-1841)
4. bsTan pa rab rgyas (1843-1927)
5. Ngag dbang blo gros phyogs las ram rgyal (1930-1990)
6. skal bzang shes rab rgya mtsho alias bsTan pa rab rgyas, the present master
4. Hierarchical system
- one mkhan po
- one bla ma
- one dbu mdzad
- one dge skos
- one rgan pa (=gnyer ba)
- one mchod dpon
- one gsol ka ba
- one lha gnyer
The incumbents are appointed (including the mkhan po) by Tshul chen and
the khri pa of rTogs ldan Monastery (No.178) on the 20th of 12th month every two
years with the exception of the dbu mdzad whose term is not fixed. As it is a branch
of rTogs Idan, there is one bla ma representing rTogs Idan Monastery,
5. Current number of monks
There are altogether fifty-seven novices and ordained monks at the monastery.
6. Current education
There are no organized classes. The young novices are trained by the elder
monks.
7. Educational exchange
The novices go to rTogs Idan to receive the preliminary (sngon 'gro) teachings
in the 4th month, as well as for other teachings and their ordination.
8/9. Rituals
- Ist month: Mon lam from the 7th to the 17th day, including ritual cycle of
Ma rgyud, the ritual of Rig 'dzin bon skor, Klong rgyas cho ga and atonement
rite of dPal Idan lha mo;
525



- 3rd month: Guru sidhi from the 10th to the 16th day;
- 4th month: the festival of the pig month (phag zla'i dus mchod) for thirteen
days starting on the 22nd day of the 4th month with the Ma rgyud tshogs
'khor for three days and Klong rgyas sgrub pa for ten days;
- 6th month: the observance of the summer fast (dbyar gnas) from the 15th day
of the 6th month to the 30th day of the 7th month;
- 12th month: Klong rgyas from the 13th to the 16th day and the dgu gtor rite
from the 27th to 29th day.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery has no regular source of income and depends on offerings from
its followers.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of five villages: de li with twenty-three
families, gDong mgo ra with twenty-one families, rТsang tsa with one family, don
pa ra with twenty-one families and gDong li with one family.
13. Local festivals
The la btsas at the top of the mountain behind the monastery is called Nag
jar sgang. It is dedicated to the local deity bDud mgon dgra lha'i rgyal bo. The la
btsas was constructed in accordance with instructions given by gDong li bsTan pa
dar rgyas, the third master of the gDong li lineage. The renewal ceremony of the la
btsas by the monks takes place on the day following the end of the dbyar gnas fast
(30th day of the 7th month). There is another la btsas called Brag dmar nor bu lha
rtse located 3 km east of the monastery on a mountain at a site called Tsher khog. It
was built following the advice given by gDong li bsTan pa lhun grub. The spirit of
the mountain is propitiated by both monks and lay people although the date of its
propitiation is not fixed.
14. Occupation of the local people
Farming and trade
Sources
(1) Interview in autumn 1998 with Ri kho bSod nam rig 'dzin (b.1942), the head of
the monastery's administrative committee
(2) Texts:
-rNga khul rnga ba rdzong gi gdong li dgon gvi lo rgyus mdor bsdus in rNga
ba khul gyi dgon pa'i lo rgyus, published by the Buddhist Association of rNga
ba Prefecture and Religion Bureau of the rNga ba Prefecture, MS, pp. 78-79
526



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(180) sNang zhig Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is sNang zhig rGyal bstan phun tshogs gling, and is
also known as sNang zhig bkra shis g-yung drung gling, or sNang zhig Phyogs las
ram rgyal bkra shis g-yung drung gling.
2. Location
The monastery is located 5 km north of Nga ba Township, the seat of rNga ba
county. There is a motorable road leading to the monastery.
3. History
The first in the succession of the sNang zhig masters is said to be Do 'phags
chen po, also known as Yon tan rgyal mtshan (b.1168). Although the latter was
responsible for spreading Bon in the area and opened several hermitages in Nga
khog, the real founder of the monastery was Nyi ma 'dzin, the eldest son of Do
'phags chen po. The first building of the establishment was Nyi ma 'dzin's own
residence (bla brang) built in 1108 and known as Gyal bstan phun tshogs gling.
Do 'phags chen po and sKyang za g-yu sgron had three sons: Nyi ma 'dzin,
*Dul ba rgyal mtshan, and gYung drung rgyal mtshan. Nyi ma 'dzin studied under
the feet of Zhu sgom "phrul zhig, but his two brothers 'Dul ba rgyal mtshan and
g Yung drung rgyal mtshan migrated to Shar khog where the former founded the
monastery ICags mdud bra shis g-yung drung gling (No.199), and the latter a
monastery known as Nang zhig dngul sku (No.201).
The descendants of the three brothers were collectively known as the three
lineages of sNang zhig" (sNang zhig khag gsum). The twenty-fourth descendant of
the eldest brother, sNang zhig Tshul khrims dbang mchog, took monastic vows. He
then divided the establishment of sNang zhig rGyal bstan phun tshogs gling into two
settlements: one for lay tantric practitioners and the other for monks.
Following is a list of the sNang zhig lineage masters:
1) Do 'phags chen po (sNang zhig Yon tan rgyal mtshan
2) Nyi ma 'dzin
3) I Hun grub rgyal mtshan
4) Kun dga'rgyal mtshan
5) Nam mkha'rgyal mtshan
6) Zla ba rgyal mtshan
7) Yon tan rgyal mtshan
8) Kun dga' lhun grub
9) Shes rab rgyal mtshan
10) I Hun grub rgyal mtshan
527



11) Shes rab 'od zer
12) Chags med bya bral
13) bstan pa rgyal mtshan
14) Tshul khrims rgyal
mtshan
15) Ye shes rgyal mtshan
16) bSod nams rgyal mtshan
17) IHun grub dbang Idan
18) bsTan pa tshul khrims
19) Rin chen Ihun grub
20) Shes rab rgyal
ba
21) Nam mkha'rgyal mtshan
22) Shes rab dbang rgyal
23) Tshe dbang rgyal mtshan
24) Tshul khrims dbang mchog
25) bsTan pa tshul khrims
26) bsTan pa lhun grub
27) Shes rab blo gros
28) Tshul khrims bstan'dzin
29) Rin chen rgyal mtshan,
30) gYung drung bstan pa dar rgyas, he founded gDong li Monastery (No. 179)
31) Sod nams rgyal mtshan
32) bsTan 'dzin dbang rgyal
33) Phun tshogs mam rgyal
34) Blo gros thogs med
35) g Yung drung bstan pa'i nyi ma
36) Grub dbang g-yung drung bstan'dzin
37) Nam mkha'blo gros
38) bsTan pa rab rgyas (1929-1961)
39) bsKal bzang blo gros rgya mtsho (b.1983)
The monastery was destroyed during the Cultural Revolution and its re-
construction was undertaken in 1980 by rGya 'obs bsTan 'dzin dbang rgyal and Slob
zur Tshul khrims bstan'dzin.
4. Hierarchical system
The sNang zhig family is the owner of the monastery" (dgon bdag) and the
present head of the monastery is sNang zhig bskal bzang blo gros rgya mtsho
(b.1983). The monastery is therefore headed by an hereditary line.
- rgyal tshab
- one khri pa, replaced every year
- one dpon sbob, replaced every three year
528



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
- two dpe khrid, (teachers), replaced every two years
- three dge skos, replaced every year
- two dbu mdzad, replaced every six years after three years the younger du
mdzad (dbu mdzad chung ha) replaces the dbu mdzad che ba, the elder du
mdzad)
- two mchod g-yog, replaced every two years after one year the mchod g-yog
chung ba, the younger mchod g-vog, replaces the mchod g-yog che ba, the
elder mchod g-yog)
- seven lha gnyer, replaced each year, one gnyer chen, replaced each year
- two yig mkhan (accountant) replaced every two years
- two drung yig, replaced every three years
5. Current number of monks
There are seven hundred novices and monks in the monastery.
6. Current education
There are thirteen classes devoted to the following metaphysic subjects: 1) Kha
tog dkar dmar, 2) bs Dus chung, 3) bs Dus 'bring, 4) bsDuschen, 5) Blo rig, 6) Tags
rig, 7) gZhung gsar, 8) gZhung gong sa lam, 9) Phar phyin, 10) 'Dul mdzod (grade:
rdo rams 'og ma), 11) dBu ma (grade: rdo rams gong ma), 12) Ngags, 13) rDzogs
chen.
For the above subjects the students use the bsDus grwa by mKhan chen Nyi
ma bstan'dzin; the works on the Khams chen by dPal chen; the five 'Phrul sgron by
mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan and commentaries on the Gab pa, mDzod and
Sa lam written by scholars from gYas ru dBen sa kha Monastery.
The monk students have classes and debate every day except during retreats;
the texts they study during retreats include texts that deal with meditation systems of
A khrid, sNyan brgyud and rDzogs chen.
Monks of the college of ritual practice (sgrub gwra) must complete the three
year retreat (lo gsum) following the Akhrid tradition of meditation,
7. Educationa exchange
sNang zhig is the largest monastic university of Bon religion in Tibet. Many
monks from various monasteries throughout Amdo and Khams visit the monastery.
sNang zhig Monastery sends its monks to teach at Tsha lung Monastery (No.193)
in rMe ba, 'Bol la (No.182) and Kun 'brog (No.183) monasteries of 'Bar khams in
Gyal rong, ICags mdud (No.199) and sNang zhig dNgul sku (No.201) in Shar khog,
rTse dbus Monastery (No.99) in Gan rgya, Dung dkar Monastery (No.132) in Chab
cha, Khyung mo Monastery (No.123) in Khri ka and Bon brgya Monastery (No.100)
in Reb gong.
529



8/9. Rituals
- Ist month: commemoration of sNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan from the
4th to the 6th day
- 2nd month: commemoration of Nang chen Kun bzang bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan
from the 1st to the 5th day and that of Gya 'obs bsTan pa rab rgyas from the
7th to the 13th day
- 3rd month: the ritual based on the Yi dam kun 'dus from the 8th day for three
days and the ritual cycle of Margyud from the 11th for four days
- 4th month: the recitation of the mantra Ma tri on the 14th day
- 5th month: the ceremony of the lighting of 10,000 butter lamps as offering to
rNam rgyal, an aspect of gShen rab Mi bo, for ten days from the 6th day
- 6th month: the ritual cycle of Phur pa from the 3rd day for seven days, the
observance of summer-fast (dbyar gnas) for seven days from the 15th day; the
ceremony of Dus khrims for seven days from the 24th day
- 11th month: commemoration of skyabs mgon Zla ba rgyal mtshan on the 7th
and 8th days
- 12th month: the ritual of the gShen rab sgrub mchod for three days from the
14th day and the dgu gtor rite for four days from the 26th day
10. Books held in the monastery
Printed editions: five copies of the Bonpo Kanjur and six copies of the Bonpo
Katen, and more than 2000 printing blocks.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery depends on offerings from the faithful and also owns a hotel in
the county town.
12. Local community
The local community consists of twenty-eight villages: mChog skyid with
thirteen families, 'Ju skor with thirty families, A ka with sixty-four families, Cha
bo with forty-one families, Ber rtsa with thirty-seven families, Thar ba with sixty
families, Ho tsa with fifteen families, Hor 'phen with thirteen families, Khos
'go with seventeen families, Kha shu with twenty-seven families, Bon sde with
seventy-five families, sPrel mgo with fifteen families, g Tsang ra with ten families,
Zhag 'dug with five families, Zhes 'phen with twenty-eight families, Grong mang
with ten families, Thes grong with twenty families, Khos mgo rtsa with eighteen
families, mGon shul with thirteen families, sTag rtsa with eighteen families, 'Tshams
ring Icag with twenty-eight families, mTha'ba with fifteen families, mGo che Icag
with thirty-eight families, Ka shul 'gab ma with forty-five families, Ka shul gong
ma with twenty-five families, Chu kha ra with five families, dGe lu with seventeen
530



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
families, Mag gsar with fifteen families. (717 families altogether)
13. Local festivals
The mountain behind the monastery, rBang brtsan bse khrab can, is located
about 10 km north of the monastery. There is a la btsas at the top whose renewal
celebration, which is attended by both religious and lay communities, takes place on
the 11th day of the 4th month. In addition, the members of the sNang zhig family
traditionally propitiated the local deity (yul tha) of Mount gNyan po g-yurtse,
located in southeast of Golok, 5368 meters high, but the custom was interrupted in
the 1960s. Recently it was revived by the present head of the sNang zhig family,
There is also a "sacred mountain" (gnas ri) called Gon lung, situated about 4 km
northwest of the monastery. It was sanctified by sNang zhig Nam mkha' blo gros. Its
veneration by the local people takes place every Horse Year
14. Occupation of the local people
Farmers and traders
Sources
(1) Interviews in autumn 1998 with: rGya 'obs bsTan 'dzin dbang rgyal (b.1928), the
present representative (rgyal tshab) of the sNang zhig master in the monastery,
and the following monks at the monastery: Nam mkha' tshul khrims (b.1930),
bsTan 'dzin ye shes (b.1931) and Phun tshogs (b.1950)
(2) Texts:
- Bon gyi 'dus sde chen po snang zhig rgyal bstan phun tshogs gling ngam bkra
shis g-yung drung gling gi chags rim lo rgyus mdor bsdus shel dkar phreng ba
by dGe bshes bsTan 'dzin phun tshogs and 'Jam dbyangs brtson 'grus, MS
-gZhi bdag gnyan po rbang bisan bse khrab can gyi bsang mchod bstod bskul
(anonymous), MS
-g Zhi bdag gnyan po g-yu rtse 'i bsang mchod bdud rtsi 'khyil ba (anonymous),
MS
- Nang dgon dkar chag gsal ba'i me long by Nam mkha' tshul khrims, MS
- Nang zhig bkra shis g-yung drung gling gi gdan rabs rdzogs Idan ngag gi
rgyal rnga by Bya 'phur Nam mkha' rgyal mtshan, Mutri Tsedpo Zhang Bod
Research Institute, Dolanji, H.P. India, 1994
- "The Monastic Lineage of sNang zhig dgon pa in Amdo rNga ba" by Don-
atella Rossi, The Tibet Journal, Vol. xxiii, No.4, pp.58-71, Winter 1998. India
Notes
1 Per Kvaerne dated the year of his birth 1028, in "The Monastery of sNang zhig of the
Bon Religion in the rNga pa District of Amdo" (Rivista degli Studi Orientali 63, 1990)
531



and this is supported by the works of Nam mkha' tshul khrims (p.9.n. MS.) and Bya
'phur Nam mkha'rgyal mtshan (p.32) mentioned above. However, dGe bshes bsTan
dzin phun tshogs and "Jam dbyangs brtson 'grus give 1088, one Rab byung (60 years)
later in their above-mentioned works. However, de bshes bs Tan 'dzin phun tshogs and
Drung ming 'Jam dbyangs brtson'grus give 1088, one rab byung (60 years later) in their
above-mentioned works. They also provide a different list of the masters from that given
by Per Kvaerne (1990) whose work is based on sNang zhig do 'phags chen po' sku
phreng gsol 'debs byin rlabs myur gzigs ma by Shes rab blo Idan (d. 1999).
(181) Cog lo Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is Cog lo rNam rgyal bsam gtan nor bu gling. Cog
lo is the name of a village in which the monastery is located.
2. Location
The monastery is located 34 km southeast of rNga ba Township,
3. History
The monastery was founded by sNang zhig Dul ba rgyal mtshan in the
Earth-Rat year of the 2nd Rab byung (1108). Originally it was located at the
confluence of IDing chu and Nga chu rivers, but following the rNga ba county
authority's decision to build a power station there, the monastery was moved to the
present site and was rebuilt in the 1980s.
'Dul ba rgyal mtshan belonged to the sNang zhig family whose lineage I have
already discussed in connection with Nang zhig Monastery (No. 180).
A khams Rin chen dar rgyas and Nam mkha' shes rab bsam gtan have been
looking after the monastery until now. There is a representative of the master of
sNang zhig (rgyal tshab bla ma) who is appointed by the sNang zhig family.
The present rgyal tshab bla ma, Tshul khrims rgyal mtshan (b.1919) was
appointed by sNang zhig bs Tan pa rab rgyas in the first half of the 20th century. He
was still occupying the position in autumn 1998 when I visited the monastery.
4. Hierarchical system
-dgong bdag (hereditary)
- rgyal tshab bla ma
- one dbu mdzad (replaced every three years)
- two gnver ba (replaced every year)
- one mchod g-yog (replaced every year)
The rgyal tshab bla ma nominates the candidates for the different positions and
532



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai. Gansu and Sichuan
submits his choice to the sNang zhig family when he visits the monastery on the
12th day of the 1st month during the annual gathering of the Mon lam. The sNang
zhig family then decide them and send knots to let them know who were selected to
be for the positions in the next morning.
5. Current number of monks
There are one hundred and nine novices and monks at the monastery.
6. Current education
There is no organized system; the novices are trained by the elder monks.
7. Educational exchange
Since it is a branch of sNang zhig Monastery, the monks are required to go to
sNang zhig for the three year retreat, ordination and further traning.
8/9. Rituals
- 1st month: commemoration of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan from the
4th to the 6th day, the recitation ceremony of the Ma tri for seven days with
'cham dance on the 13th day, the new incumbents of the positions mentioned
above are appointed on the 14th day, the new dge bskos enthroned on the 15th
day, this is followed by the ritual based on the 'Khor ba stong 'dren for three
days and the gYung drung klong gyas on the 12th day
- 4th month: the ritual based on the rNam rgyal stong mchod from the 13th to
the 15th day, followed by the Zhi khro ritual for two days and the mNyam med
bla sgrub ceremony for one day
- 5th month: the ritual based on the 'Khor ba stong 'dren again from the 14th to
the 17th day
- 6th month: the mNyam med bla sgrub ceremony again and that of skyabs
mgon (Zla ba rgyal mtshan) on the 15th and 16th days
- 7th month: the observance of the summer fast (dbyar gnas) for nine days from
the 21st day
- 9th month: the ritual cycle of sTag la for ten days from the 21st
- 10th month: commemoration of sNang zhig bsTan pa rab rgyas on the 28th
day
- 12th month: the ritual based on the gYung drung klong rgyas from the 14th to
the 16th day, immediately followed by the ritual of Man lha from the 17th to
the 19th day
- 13th month: the ritual cycle of dBal gsas on the 27th and 28th days followed
by the glor bzlog rite and a 'cham dance on the 29th day, and another cham
dance on the 30th day of the same month
533



11. Income expenses
The monastery has lent 100 000 Yuan to the local people and in return receives
1400 Yuan interest per year. In addition, the monastery owns nine female yaks
that are kept by the villagers who in return give the monastery 4kg of butter per
yak every year (1 kg of butter cost 7 Yuan in 1998). The monastery also receives
offerings from its followers. The monks must provide their own food.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of four villages: A dus with twenty-five
families, sNa skor with forty-two families, Khyung dga' with twenty-eight families
and sGom pa with twelve families.
13. Local festivals
The mountain behind the monastery is known as Dung khyung. Its la btsas
called Khyung sras dGe legs bstan sras was constructed with the instructions given
by sNang zhig bs Tan pa rab rgyas. The mountain spirit is propitiated by the monks
of the monastery.
There is also a sacred mountain (gnas ri) known as Gya mkhar 'go. It is
located 2 km south of the monastery. The mountain was sanctified by rTogs Idan
Gyal ba dbang Idan and is venerated by both the monks and local lay people in the
10th month of the Horse Year.
The village A 'dus has five la btsas: Wer sgo, g Ya' khang, gSas mkhar, Brag
skar and gNam lha dkar chen, whose annual renewal ceremony takes place on the
11th day of the 1st and 4th months. The village sNa skor has six la bisas: Dung
khyung, IHa ri dar'dzin, gNyan, gYung drung lha rtse, sTag rtse and A myes brag
dkar. The local deities, to whom the la btsas are dedicated, are propitiated on the
same days as those of the A 'dus village. The village Khyung dga' has two la btsas:
Nag rgas and Zhig gung and sGom pa has only one la btsas, Di 'gu. The dates of
their renewal ceremony are not fixed.
14. Occupation of the local population
Farmers
Sources
(1) Interviews with the following monks at the monastery in autumn 1998: Gra 'dul
(b.1937), Shes rab (b.1938) and Tshul khrims (b.1958)
(2) Texts:
-rNga khul rNga ba rdzong gi cog lo dgon gyi lo rgyus mdor bsdus in rNga ba
khul gyi dgon pa'i lo rgyus, Buddhist Association of rNga ba Prefecture and
Religion Bureau of Nga ba Prefecture, pp. 71-72
534



rMa-chu County
gCig-sgril County
muz
-
khog
Nga-stodo
sanz-chie/
bs-bg . 41796yldan
rNga
sepingshose
soming
a Blon-thang
Nga-baleno
rNga-bat:fie-skor
A
rMe'u-ru-ma
ba ang
82
Lo-ta
Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
rNga
agDong-li
Badner Nga-smad
Cog-lo
Na-skor mishan-ayid
County Seat
Zhin-rmin
District Seat
Maskord
modo
Township Seat
Administrative Village
Monastery
535
County Border
Township Border
River
Road
rMe-ba County
1/730,000



(178) rTogs Idan Monastery, Plate 1
ima
(178) rogs dan Monastery, Plate 2 Orgyan lha khang mthong ba don Idan at the monastery
536



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(178) rTogs Idan Monastery, Plate 3 Bon blon Nam mkha' bstan'dzin
(b.1932), one of the three masters at the monastery
537



(178) rTogs Idan Monastery, Plate 4 Tshul chen Theg mchog bstan pa'i
nyi ma (b.1937), one of the three masters at the monastery
538



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(178) Togs Idan Monastery, Plate 5 Khri pa Jam dbyangs mkhyen rab
rgya mtsho, one of the three masters at the monastery
539



(179) gDong li Monastery
(180) sNang zhig Monastery, Plate 1
540



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(180) Nang zhig Monastery. Plate 2 The assembly hall of the monastery
(180) sNang zhig Monastery, Plate 3 The Gyal khang temple in the monastery
541



(180) sNang zhig Monastery, Plate 4 bskal bzang blo gros rgya mtsho (b. 1983).
the thirty-ninth master of the sNang zhig Lineage
542



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
(180) Nang zhig Monastery, Plate 5 Gya 'og bstan 'dzin dbang rgyal
(b.1928), the present Gyal tshab of sNang zhig bskal bzang blo
gros rgya mtsho at the monastery
543



(181) Coglo Monastery
544



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
'Bar khams
'Bar khams county belongs to rNga ba Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture,
Sichuan Province. The county town is 'Bar khams which is also the capital of rNga
ba Prefecture. There are 104 villages divided between 15 townships. The county
covers an area of 6,346 sq km. The population is 59,180. 30,379 of whom were
Tibetans in 1980.
The Religion Bureau of 'Bar khams county has divided the monasteries of
rGyal rong, including those of 'Bar khams into three categories: those whose monks
are "away from work", or full-time monks (las bral grwa pa), those whose monks
are "half-away from work", or part-time monks (las phyed grwa pa), and those
whose monks are "seasonal monks" (dus tshigs kyi grwa pa). The first category
refers to monks who live in the monastery on a permanent basis; the second to those
who live outside the monastery and who go to the monastery only to perform the
annual rituals; the third to those who live in the monastery but who go back to their
homes to help during the ploughing and harvest seasons. The monks belonging to
the second and third categories are generally laymen.
(182) 'Bo la Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is 'Bo la sTobs Idan glang chen dgon.
2. Location
The monastery is located 2 km north of 'Bar khams.
3. History
According to oral tradition, the monastery's history goes back more than a
thousand years, but no one knows its details. It seems that it was connected to a
master called 'Bro re bla ma who was born in 'Bo la village. It was wrecked during
the Cultural Revolution and was rebuilt in the late 1980s.
"Bo la was formerly a branch of 'Bar khams gYung drung lha steng. After the
conversion of 'Bar khams Monastery to the de lugs pa tradition in the 18th century
Bo la Monastery was left without a proprietor.
Tshul khrims bstan'dzin (b.1928) was chosen among the monks to be the head
of the present monastery.
4. Hierarchical system
-dgon bdag
- one dbu mdzad
$45



- one dge skos
-three gnyer pa (one gnyer pa rgan pa, senior and gnyer pa gzhon pa, junior)
The incumbents of these positions are replaced every two years.
5. Current number of monks
The monastery counted thirty-three novices and monks in autumn 1998.
6. Current education
There is no particular system, the novices are trained by the elder monks.
8/9. Rituals
Annual ritual of offering the sacrificial cake (tshogs) one thousand times to the
protective goddess Srid rgyal drel dmar from the 3rd to the 9th day of the 5th month
and the performance of the ritual cycle of sTag la for three days in winter time with
no fixed dates.
10. Income and expenses
The monastery has no regular source of income. It depends on offerings from
the faithful. The monks provide their own food.
12. Local community
The local lay community of the monastery consists of three villages: Dur ma
with twenty families, Zhig bro with twenty families and Hor pa with eighty families.
13. Local festivals
The mountain behind the monastery has a la btsas dedicated to the local deity
called 'Bo la dPal chen skyong ri and the propitiation festival takes place on the 13th
day of the 6th month.
14. Occupation of the local people
Farmers
Sources
(1) Interviews in autumn 1998 with: Tshe dbang (b.1937), a monk at the monastery,
dBang Idan (b.1923), a lay sponsor of the monastery
(2) Texts:
-rNga khul 'bar khams rdzong gi 'bo la dgon pa'i lo rgyus mdor bsdus in rNga
ba khul gvi dgon pa'l lo rgyus, Religion Bureau and the Buddhist Association
of the rNga ba Prefecture, MS., pp.197-198
546



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(183) Kun 'brog Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is Kun 'brog (pronounced as Kubro) g-yung drung
dgon.
2. Location
The monastery is located 35 km southeast of 'Bar khams Township, the seat of
county.
3. History
According to oral tradition, the monastery was founded two thousand years
ago, but there are no written records and the details of its history remain unknown.
4. Hierarchical system
- one bla ma
- two dge skos
- two gnyer pa
The dge bskos and gnyer pa are replaced every two years.
5. Current number of monks
There were twenty-one novices and monks in the monastery in autumn 1998.
6. Current education
The novice monks are trained by the elder monks.
7. Educational exchanges
The monastery is regarded as a branch of sNang zhig Monastery (No.180) in
rNga khog and sends its novices there to study. There were five monks from sNang
zhig Monastery when I visited the monastery in autumn 1998.
8/9. Rituals
The observance of the smyung gnas fasting from the 10th to the 15th day of the
4th month; the ritual based on the mNyam med bla sgrub from the 1st to the 6th of
the 5th month; the ritual cycle of Khro bo from the the 15th to the 20th day of the
12th month.
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery does not possess any collection of books. Only a few of the
monks possess their own texts for liturgical purposes.
547



11. Income and expenses
The monastery depends on donations and has no regular source of income. The
monks provide their own food.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of two villlages: Kur bu with twenty families
and Kor tag with thirty-six families.
14. Occupation of the local people
Farmers
Sources
(1) Interviews during autumn 1998 with bZang po (b.1934)
(2) Texts:
-rNga khul 'bar khams rdzong gi kun 'brog g-yung drung dgon pa'i lo rgyus
mdor bsdus, in Nga ba khul gyi dgon pa'i lo rgyus, the Religion Bureau and
Buddhist Association of rNga ba Prefecture, p.202
(184) Ka ca Monastery
The monastery is located 80 km northwest of the 'Bar khams Township, seat
of the county. It is a very small establishment. Its only monk, Pad ma, was studying
at rTogs Idan Monastery (No.178) in rNga khog as ka ca is regarded as a branch
of rTogs Idan, even though no one knows how and when the connection was
established. When I visited the monastery 1998 there was only one elderly caretaker
in the monastery. So far, no written records are available.
(185) Ka co Monastery
1. Name
Ka co monastery is also known as Ta rdo ko, after the hill on which it is
located
2. Location
It is located 78 km from 'Bar khams Township, seat of the county.
3. History
There are ruins of a monastery which are said to be very old and probably
548



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
those of the original monastery, but no one seems to know who the founder was and
when it was destroyed. The present monastery was founded by Dza rong Nyi ma
bstan 'dzin, a master of Tsha lung Monastery (No.193) located in the same area but
belonging to rMe ba county. The monastery was knocked down during the Cultural
Revolution. It was rebuilt in the 1980s.
4. Hierarchical system
The monastery has a dgon bdag and the gnyer pa acts temporarily as head of
the monastery in the absence of the dgon bdag who is Dza rong Nam mkha'rin chen
as mentioned above.
There are no other official positions.
5. Current number of monks
There were nine lay practitioners living with their families.
6. Current education
The younger practitioners are trained by the elder ones.
7. Educational exchange
The monastery is a branch of Tsha lung Monastery and Dza rong Nam mkha'
rin chen regularly visits the monastery to give teachings
8/9. Rituals
The only annual ritual is that of the rNam par rgyal ba'i stong mchod which is
performed for three days in the 5th month.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery has no regular source of income and depends on offerings.
12. Local lay community
The local community is the Ka co village with sixty-three families.
13. Local festivals
The mountain behind the monastery is known as Tardo ko and it has two la
btsa: gYung drung Iha rtse and Tshe 'dzin. The annual propitiation of the mountain
spirit takes place in the 6th month.
14. Occupation of the local people
Farmers
549



Source
(1) Interview in autumn 1998 with Dar lo (b.1938), a lay practitioner at the
monastery
(186) dGon gsar Monastery
1. Name
The full name of the monastery is sPa tshang dgon gsar nor bu gling. It is also
known as Pa tshang Monastery.
2. Location
The monastery is located about 80 km north of 'Bar mkhams (70 km of
motorable road and a further four hours' walk uphill).
3. History
The history of the monastery remains unknown. It was demolished during the
Cultural Revolution and was rebuilt in the 1980s. The present head of the monastery
is sPa tshang Tshul khrims bstan pa rab rgyas (b.1970). He studied at sNang zhig
Monastery (No.180) for four years and at the Tibetan Buddhist College in Beijing
for two years.
4. Hierarchichal system
-dgon bdag
- one dbu mdzad (replaced every five years)
- one dge skos (replaced every five years)
- one mchod dpon (replaced every three years)
- one do dam pa (replaced every three years) SA
N
5. Current number of monks
There were twenty-six novices and monks at the monastery in autumn 1998,
6. Current education
There are no organized classes, the younger novices are trained by the elder
monks.
7. Educational exchange
The monastery has been closely connected with sNang zhig Monastery since
the time of the twenty-third master of the sPa tshang lineage. Nang zhig sends a
teacher who is replaced every three or four years, and every three years Gon sar
550



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
sends three novices to sNang zhig for training and ordination.
8/9. Rituals
- 4th month: ceremony of the mChod pa stong mtshan from the 8th to the 15th
day
- 6th month: the observance of the summer fast (dbyar gnas) from the 8th to the
15th day
- 12th month: the sgrub mchod dgu gtor rite from the 11th to the 14th day with
a 'cham dance on the last day
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has one printed copy of the Bonpo Kanjur, one printed copy of
the Khams chen, one printed copy of Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan's collected
works and various manuscript copies of ritual texts.
11. Income and exppenses
The monastery has no regular source of income and depends on offerings; the
monks provide their own food.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of two villages: Myo kyo with twenty-five
families and Mad yul with seventy families.
13. Local festivals
The bsang ceremony on a mountain called 'Byo ko g-yung drung Iha rtse is
performed by the monastic community on the 16th day of the 6th month.
There are three la btsas: rMa bya, Wer rtse ko and Shu ku. The dates of the
renewal ceremony of these la btsas are not fixed.
14. Occupation of the local people
Farmers
Sources
(1) Interview in autumn 1998 with spa tshang Tshul khrims bstan pa rab rgyas
(b.1970)
(2) Texts:
- An untitled text about the monastery by sPa tshang Tshul khrims bstan pa rab
rgyas, MS
551



Nga-ba County
©
County Seat
552
District Seat
Guro
rMe-ba County
@
Township Seat
Ke-cak-
o
Administrative Village
Ka-Co
Mya-kyo
Monastery
Ki-ding gDong-brgyad
uyusu
To s Mad-yuh
Goa-gar
fogas. Ja-myos
lo Mya kyo
County Border
Township Border
River
Road
Footpath
Ja-phug
1/660,000
'Bar - Khams County
kyo
che
Lha-rgyal-gling
Ayom kyo
kro
phys-kyo
Dzog 846
saysPun-chene
560-3
MI-tse
Kun-broly
6 Te'u-shug
Kub-se mgo . Murekhyu
Bar-khams
Cor-te
ger-ri
Pat-Pa . Mur-khyu
Mo-mtsho
Chu-chen County



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
(182) 'Bo la Monastery
(183) Kun 'brog Monastery
553



(184) ka ca Monastery
(185) Ka co Monastery
554



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(186) dGon gsar Monastery
555



Chu chen County
Chu chen county is situated in rNga ba Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture,
Sichuan Province. The county seat is Chu chen, 92 km from 'Bar khams, the capital
of the rNga ba Prefecture government. There are 127 villages divided among
thirteen townships townships. The county covers an area of 5,550 sq km. The
population is 68,215, of whom 20,496 were Tibetans in 1980.
(187) gYung drung Iha steng Monastery
1. Name
gYung drung lha steng (or lha sding)
2. Location
The monastery is located around 33 km south of Chu chen Township, seat of
the Chu chen county,
3. History
According to written sources, the monastery was founded in the Fire-Dog
year of the 1st Rab byung (1046). The monastery was at one time one of the two
major Bonpo centres of the eighteen kingdoms of rGyal rong.? Among their kings,
those of ICags la, bТsan lha, Wo gzhi, Se mo rdzing 'gag, Cog tse, Dam pa, Khro
skyabs, gZim g-yag, dGe bshes tsa and Yar rgan became important sponsors of
the monastery, mKhan chen bSod nams rgyal mtshan and sTag dngos Shes rab
g-yung drung conducted the monastery's consecration ceremony (rab gnas) after its
completion.
According to an inscription, one of the kings took his dge bsnyen vows from
Kun grol grags pa (b.1700) and received the name of Nam mkha' g-yung drung ye
shes. Later he was ordained a monk by mKhan chen bSod nams rgyal mtshan.
After Gyal rong's conquest by the Manchu emperor Qianlong in 1778, the
monastery was converted to the de lugs pa tradition by force and was given the
Chinese name of Guang fa si (bsTan 'phel gling). The practice of Bon religion
was forbidden by an edict. As a result, the monastery fell under the authority of
"Bras spungs Monastery near Lhasa which immediately appointed an abbot for the
monastery. It continued to do so until the 1950s. Only some of the names of the
abbots sent from Lhasa are known to us:
1. Sangs rgyas 'od zer
2. Grags pa phun tshogs
3. Blo bzang 'jam dbyangs
4. Ngag dbang bstan'dzin
556



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
5. Blo bzang don Idan
6. Jam dbyangs smon lam
7. Ngag dbang lihun grub
8. bsTan pa rin chen
9. Ngag dbang bzang po
10. Grags pa chos 'phel
11. Blo bzang chos 'phel
12. Sangs rgyas bstan'dzin
13. 'Jam dbyangs yar 'phel
14. Blo bzang dam chos
15. Jam dbyangs sbyin pa
16. 'Jam dbyangs yarphel
(The names of Nos. 17-29 are not clear)
30. bSod nams yon tan,
31. Blo bzang thub bstan,
32. mkhyen brtse ngag dbang blo gros
33. Kun Idan rin chen
34. Blo bzang shes rab
35. Gyal ba shes rab
36. Yon tan nyi ma
37.A khu ye shes
38. gYu bo blo gros
39. Gyal rong dge bshes
40.dGe 'dun rin chen,
41. Ngag dbang dpal Idan (1881-1953)
During the Cultural Revolution the moanstery was razed. In the 1980s the
central government generously gave 300,000 Chinese Yuan for the monastery's
reconstruction.
Bon blon Nam mkha' bstan'dzin (b.1932) of rTogs Idan Monastery (No.88)
in Nga khog, oversaw the work with the assistance of Rin chen rgyal, sTag Iha
skyabs, Legs bshad rgya mtsho, Ya ma bkra shis and Tshe ring phun tshogs. At
the beginning, because of the monastery's conversion, there was some discussion
between Bonpo and Ge lugs pa as to which tradition the monastery should
belong, but since the majority of the local population wanted it to be Bonpo, the
local authorities handed it over to the Bonpo community. The reconstruction was
completed in 1989 and Bon blon Nam mkha' bstan 'dzin became the khri pa and Rin
chen rgyal became the mkhan po of the monastery.
The monastery is supported by rTogs ldan Monastery which sends teachers and
holds regular annual rituals there to revive Bonpo religious activities in the region
after two centuries of de lugs pa dominance. Since 1990, the local people select
557



the khri pa and mkhan po every year from various Bonpo monasteries in Gyal
rong, such as Bla med and Brag dben Monasteries in Chu chen county, Khyung
lung Monastery (No.171) in Rong brag county. In 1990 Legs bshad rgya mtsho of
Bla med Monastery (No.190) was selected as the khri pa and Rin chen rgyal as the
mkhan po. In 1991 skal bzang and Ya ma bkra shis were respectively khri pa and
mkhan po, in 1992 Tshe dbang rgyal mtshan and sTag Iha, in 1993 Rab brtan and
Legs bshad, in 1994 Orgyan and bSod nams, in 1995 Tshul khrims mthar phyin and
bSod nams, in 1996 Tshul khrims dar rgyas and bSod nams, in 1997 Pad ma and
gYung drung.
4. Hierarchical system
- one khri pa
- one mkhan po
- one gnyer pa
All the incumbents of the above-listed positions are replaced every year.
5. Current number of monks
The number of monks is extremely variable since they come from various
monasteries in Gyal rong and stay there for a few months or a few years. Generally,
there are between five and fifteen novices and monks at a time.
6. Educationa Exchange
The monastery has close ties with rTogs ldan Monastery as well as with several
monasteries in Gyal rong, especially with those that send monks and sponsor the
monastery.
7. Current education
There is no particular system of education.
8/9. Rituals
Since there is no fixed number of monks at the monastery, there are no fixed
annual rituals
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery only has the usual ritual texts.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery has no regular source of income and depends on offerings from
its followers. The monks provide their own food.
558



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
12. Local community
The local lay community consists mainly of the population in the A nyin area
among other Bonpo communities in Gyal rong.
14. Occupation of the local people
Farmers
Sources
(1) Interviews in autumn 1998 with Bon blon Nam mkha' bstan'dzin (b.1932), a
trulku of rTogs Idan Monastery
(2) Texts:
-rNga khul chu chen rdzong gi g-yung drung lha lding dgon pa 'i lo rgyus mdor
bsdus in rNga ba khul gyi dgon pa'i lo rgyus, MS, pp.244-248. Compiled by
the Religion Bureau and the Buddhist Association of rNga ba Prefecture
- Samten G. Karmay, "The Decree of the Khro-chen King", Acta Orientalia 51,
(Copenhagen) 1990: 141-159
- Per Kvaerne, Elliot Sperling, Preliminary Study of an Inscription from
Rgyal-rong, Acta Orientalia (Copenhagen) 1993, 54, 113-125
Notes
1 A short anonymous history of g Yung drung Iha steng, pp. 244-248 in rNga khul gyi dgon
pa'y lo rgvus published by the Religion Bureau and the Buddhist Association of rNga ba
Prefecture, MS. According to another point of view, the monastery was founded in the
13th century, see Si khron zhing chen mga ba bod rigs rang skyong khul chu chen rdzong
gi sa cha'i ming btus by Chu chen rdzong sa ming 'go khrid tsho chung, p.155. 1984, 'Bar
khams.
2
The other was mTsho mtho Monastery (No.188).
(188) m Tsho mtho Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is mTsho mtho gShen bstan nor bu'i gling. It is also
known as Tsho steng Monastery.
2. Location
The monastery is located 40 km northwest of Chu chen, the seat of the Chu
chen county (there is a distance of 36 km from the county town to Sa ba kyo
township, and another 4 km from there to the monastery).
559



3. History
The monastery was founded two years before the introduction of the Rab byung
system of datation (1027). It is not certain who the founder was. A list of the names
of its abbots is available:
1. bs Tan pa rgyal mtshan
2. bSam gtan phun tshogs
3. Legs pa rgyal mtshan
4. gYung drung khri zer
5. dBang rgyal bstan'dzin
6. Nor bu dpal dbang
7. Tshe dbang
8. Sha trog pa 9 0
9. Nam mkha' bstan'dzini
10. bkra shis rgyal
mtshan
11. Sod nams g-yung drung
12. bs Tan 'dzin nor bu
13. Nam mkha' dbang rgyal
14. gYung drung bstan'dzin
15. 'Dul rgyal phun tshogs
16. IHa dbang bstan'dzin
17. Nam mkha' bstan'dzin
18. Nam mkha' dbang Idan
19. Sod nam bstan 'dzin
20. Nyi ma dbang rgyal
21. Nam mkhaº nha suron
22. Sangs rgyas bstan 'dzin
23. bsTan pa'i blo gros
24. Nyi ma grags pa
25. gShen rgyal bstan 'dzin, the present abbot
4. Hierarchical system
- mkhan po
-dge bskos (elected by the monks for three years)
-dbu mdzad
- mchod dpon
In this monastery, it is the dge bskos who appoints the dbu mdzad, Iha gnyer
and mchod dpon, and who determines their terms of office.
5. Current number of monks
There were thirty novices and monks in the monastery in autumn 1998.
560



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
6. Current education
There are six different classes devoted to the following sbjects:
1) Sum rtags snyan gsum (sum cu pa, rtags Jug and snyan ngag)
2) Tshad ma
3) 'Dul ba
4) dBu ma
5) Phar phyin
6) mDzod
8/9. Rituals
Commemoration of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan on the 4th and the 5th
days of the 1st month, ritual based on the gYung drung klong rgyas from the 10th to
the 15th of the same month; the observance of the smyung gnas fast on the 14th and
the 15th days of the 6th month; the recitation ritual known as Ti tri su'i sgrub chen
on the 14th and the 15th days of the 11th month.
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has one printed copy of the Bonpo Kanjur, one printed copy of
Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan's collected works.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery has no regular source of income and depends on offerings from
the faithful. The monks provide their own food.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of four communities: A lag sho, Mu khre, Le
dam and Kyab kya bho.
A lag sho community comprises four villages: We bu with nine families, Tho
bo with four families, De thul with sixteen families and m Tsho mtho with twenty
families.
Mukhre community comprises five villages: Sa me with seven families, Dan
ceb with twenty-two families, Mu khre with twenty-one families, Mur ye with six
families and Yu ska with four families.
Le dam community comprises three villages: Le dam with twelve families,
Gyal gu with three families and gZhi bzhor with thirty families.
Kyab kya bo community comprises three villages: IDe bzo with twenty-four
families, Kyab kyo bo with fifty families and Le bu with twelve families. In addition
there are ten nomad families connected with the four communities.
561



13. Local festivals
The mountain behind the monastery has a la bstas called Mo khrom dedicated
to the spirit of the mountain. Its renewal festival takes place on the 5th of the 5th
month.
There is also a sacred mountain known as Shel ri stag gsum located four hours!
walk west of the monastery. It is venerated only by the Bonpo communities on the
5th of the 5th month.
14. Occupation of the local people
Farmers, nomads
Sources
(1) Interviews with the following monks in autumn 1998: g Yung drung bstan 'dzin
(b.1923) and Blo gros kun gsal (b.1933)
(2) Texts:
- Nga khul chu chen rdzong mtsho steng dgon pa'i lo rgyus mdor bsdus in
rNga ba khul gvi dgon pa'i lo rgyus. Compiled by the Religion Bureau and
Buddhist Association of Nga ba Prefecture, MS, pp. 241-243
-rNga khul chu chen rdzong mtsho steng dgon pa'i lo rgyus mdor bsdus
provides dates for the most of the abbots, but does not seem reliable enough to
quote here.
(189) dGra lha khyung dgon Monastery
1. Name
The monastery has several names: 'Brug ri bkra shis khyung dgon, Khyung
khu, Khyung dgon and Brag bondgon.
2. Location
The monastery is located in 41 km northwest of Chu chen, seat of the Chu chen
county,
3. History
The monastery was founded by gShen rab rgyal in the Earth-Sheep year of the
3rd Rab byung (1199). Following is a list of the monastery's successive abbots:
1. gShen rab rgyal
2. A thang rtswa zan
3. Bla ma ka chen
4. Nam mkha' dbang Idan



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
5. Togs Idan bsTan “dzin phun tshogs
6. bsTan pa 'brug grags
7. bsTan pa blo gros
8. gShen rab dbang rgyal
9. Shes rab tshul khrims
10. Tshe dbang 'gyur med
11. bsTan pa blo gros rgyal mtshan (1910-1958)
12. Shes rab (1941-1963)
13. gYung drung tshul khrims
14. gYung drung ye shes
15. Bla marGyal mtshan
16. Bla ma bsTan 'dzin
The monastery was demolished during the Cultural Revolution and was rebuilt
in the 1980s. The present master of the monastery is Rab brtan. He was chosen
among the monks of the monastery.
4. Hierarchical system
- one bla ma
- one dbu mdzad (replaced every three years)
- one dge skos (replaced every three years)
- two gnyer ba (replaced every two years)
- two lha gnyer (replaced every month)
5. Cuirrent number of monks
There were twenty-eight novices and monks at the monastery in autumn 1998,
6. Current education
There are no organized classes. The novices are taught by one of the learned
monks.
8/9. Rituals
Commemoration of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan from the 4th to the 6th
day of the 1st month; the ritual cycle of Ma rgyud from the 8th to the 10th day of the
4th month; the observance of the smyung gnas fasting from the 11th to the 14th day
of the 10th month.
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has one printed copy of the Kanjur and various ritual texts in
manuscript.
563



11. Income and expenses
The monastery has no regular source of income and depends on offerings from
the faithful. The monks provide their own food.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of three communities: Mal nib community
has 8 villages: bZhi mdo with thirteen families, Gye le with eight families, Ka yam
kro with eight families, Yi ban kyo with six families, A go with four families, Li
phru with fourteen families, Tang khu with six families, Ru rdo with six families.
Le Itam pe community has five villages: Ka lo with seven families, rMa mdo
with twenty families, Nga kyab with twelve families, Pa le with twenty families and
sPo to with five families.
Gya yag community has five villages: Yi rdib with eighteen families, Pi kye
with eleven families, Sa yo with fifteen families, Mo lo kyo with thirteen families
and Mi len teb with fifteen families.
13. Local festivals
Dze mu At the top of the mountain behind the monastery there is la btsas
dedicated to the local deity called Dze mu who is propitiated by the monks on the
5th of the 5th month, and another la btsas for the local deity rDza nag located near
the monastery to the east, also propitiated on the 5th of the 5th month.
There is also a sacred mountain (gnas ri) called dGra lha khyung rtse 5 km
north of the monastery. This was sanctified by Grub thob gShen rab rgyal and is
venerated by the whole local population on the 4th day of the 5th month.
14. Occupation of the local population
Farmers
Sources
(1) Interviews with following monks at the monastery in autumn 1998: Rab brtan
(b.1933), Zhi tho pur (b.1931), Drung drung (b.1931)
(2) Texts:
. Nga khul chu chen rdzong gi khyung dgon gyi lo rgyus mdor bsdus.
Compiled by the Religion Bureau and the Buddhist Association of Nga ba
Prefecture, MS, pp.239-240
564



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(190) Bla med Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is Bla med yid bzhin nor bu'i gling.
2. Location
The monastery is located 110 km west of Chu chen, seat of the Chu chen
county.
3. History
According to Yon tan rgya mtsho (dGon pa'i lo rgyus mdor bsdus, MS) the
monastery was founded Rig pa rang shar at the age of thirty-seven and died at the
age of ninety-five.
Following is a list of the monastery's masters:
1. Dza bo Rig pa rang shar
2. gSal ba 'od chen
3. gSal ba od chung
4. Dran pa bdud 'dul
5. bShes yes dbon po
6. rNam dag rgyal mtshan
7. g Tsug phud 'od zer
8. gYung drung rgyal mtshan
9. Khro bo rgyal
10. Kun bzang rgyal mtshan
11. Tshul khrims
12. Thub pa
13. Nam dag 'od zer
14. Ngag dbang rgya mtsho
15. Sod nams nyi ma
16. Theg pa rgyal mtshan
17. Phun tshogs rnam rgyal
18. Blo gros thub bstan
19. Shes pa
20. Rin chen Ihun grub
21. bs Tan 'dzin grags pa
22. Shes rab nyi ma
23. Shes rab dbang Idan
24. Zla ba rgyal mtshan
25. Phun tshogs dbang rgyal
26. Sod nams blo gros
565



RTI
27. bsTan 'dzin tshul khrims
28 g Yung drung phun tshogs
29. Kun bzang Ihun grub
30 Shes rab kun gsal
31. skal bzang nor bu
32. sByin pa
33. gYung drung rnam dag
34. gYung drung mthu rtsal
35. Tshul khrism 'od zer
36. Tshe dbang rgyal mtshan?
4. Hierarchical system
- one dbu mdzad (replaced every three years)
- one dge skos (replaced every three years)
- one gnyer ba (replaced every year)
- one mchod dpon (replaced every year)
5. Current number of monks
There were forty-five novices and monks at the monastery in autumn 1998,
6. Current education
There are no organized classes; the novices are trained by the elder monks.
7. Educational exchange
The novices are sent to the monasteries of sNang zhig (No.180) and Togs Idan
(No.178) for their ordination and further training,
8/9. Rituals
Commemoration of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan on the 5th day and the
ritual based on the gYung drung klong rgyas from the 15th to the 18th day of the 1st
month; the rituals performed in summer known as dbyar sgrub from the 1st day of
the 6th month and those performed in winter dgun sgrub starting in the 11th month.
10. Books held in the monastery
One printed copy of Kanjur published by Nam mkha' bstan'dzin and one
printed copy of Katen published by bsTan pa'i nyi ma.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery owns thirty 'bri (female yak) which are kept by the local people
for the monastery with the shi med contract. Otherwise the monastery depends on
566



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
offerings from the faithful and has no regular source of income.
13. Local festivals
There is a sacred mountain (gnas ri) called Ma rgyud gsang mchog, west of
the monastery. It is surrounded by four mountains at the four directions: g Yung
drung gtams rdzong to the east, 'Khor lo brtsegs rdzong to the north, Padma spungs
rdzong to the west and Rin chen 'bar rdzong to the south. There is a la btsas on top
of each mountain which are dedicated to the spirits of the mountains.
The main sacred mountain was sanctified by g Ter ston Tshe dbang 'gyur med
who is said to have retrieved many gter ma scriptures from it. There is a hermitage
facing the principal mountain. The propitiation ceremony of the mountain by the
local people takes place on the 22nd day of the 5th month.
14. Economic occupation of the local population
Farmers
Sources
(1) Interviews in autumn of 1998 with Yon tan rgya mtsho and Ya ma bkra shis
(b.1934)
(2) Texts:
-dGon pa 'i lo rgyus mdor bsdus by Yon tan rgya mtsho, MS
- Nga khul chu chen rdzong gi bla med dgon pa'i lo rgyus mdor bsdus in
rNga ba khul gvi dgon pa 'i lo rgyus, the Religion Bureau and the Buddhist
Association of rNga pa Prefecture, MS, pp.236-238
Notes
1 According to another source, the monastery was founded by Rig pa rang shar 114 years
before the introduction of the Rab byung system of datation, in 913 A.D. (see rNga khul
chu chen rdzong gi bla med dgon pa'i lo rgyus mdor bsdus, p.236).
2 The rNga khul chu chen rdzong gi bla med dgon pa'i lo rgyus mdor bsdu provides a list of
masters of the same lineage differently: 1) Dza bo Rig pa rang shar, 2) gSal ba 'od chen,
3) gSal ba 'od chung, 4) Dran pa bdud 'dul, 5) Shes yas dbon po, 6) rNam dag bshes
yas, 7) Gyal mtshan bshes yas, 8) Shes rab 'od zer, 9) g Yung drung rgyal ba, 10) Kho
bo rgyal, 11) Kun dga' rgyal mtshan, 12) Tshul khrims, 13) Thub pa, 14) g Yung drung
nam dag, 15) bsTan "dzin tshul khrims, 16) gYung dung phun tshogs, 17) Kun dga''od
zer, 18) Legs bshad rgya mtsho (b.1931), 19) Ya ma bkra shis (b.1934), 20) gYung drung
rab rgyal (b.1962), 21) Yon tan rab rgyal (b.1962), 22) dPal ldan rab rgyal (b.1971), 23)
mThar phyin rab rgyal (b.1971).
567



(191) bZod sgom Monastery
to
1. Name
The monastery's full name is bZod sgom bkra shis ram rgyal gling.
2. Location
The monastery is located 74 km northwest of Chu chen, the seat of the county.
3. History
The monastery was founded by Pa go Shes rab rgyal mtshan (992-1043) in the
Earth-Dragon year of the 1st Rab byung (1028). Following is a list of his successors:
1. Pa go Shes rab rgyal mtshan
2. Pa go bSod nams blo gros (1030-1095)
3. Pa go Phun tshogs dbang rgyal (1092-1141)
4. Kun bzang rgyal mtshan (1136-1199)
5. Sod nams rgyal mtshan (1202-1275)
6. Rin chen rgyal mtshan (1266-1339)
7. gYung drung bstan 'dzin (1336-1408)
8. gYung drung gtsug phud (1398-1448)
9. skal bzang g-yung drung (1444-1498)
10. Nyi ma bstan 'dzin (1466-1552)
11. Phun tshogs ram rgyal (1550-1612)
12. skal bzang blo gros (1609-1689)
13. gYung drung dbang ldan (1687-1771)
14. bsTan pa dar rgyas (1768-1836)
15. Shes rab bstan 'dzin (1916-1963)
After the time of Kun bzang rgyal mtshan, the fourth master in the line, the
monastery was looked after by the masters of Gra lha Khyung dgon Monastery
(No.189). Thus from that time onwards the monastery became a branch of dGra lha
khyung dgon. The monastery was rebuilt in the nineteen-eighties.
4. Hierarchical system
- two dbu mdzad (with indefinite terms of office)
- one dge skos (replaced every two years)
- three gnyer ba (replaced every two years)
- one mchod dpon (replaced each year)
5. Current number of monks
There were thirty-six and novices monks at the monastery in autumn 1998.
568



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
6. Current education
There are no organized classes. The young novices are trained by the elder
monks.
7. Educationa exchange
Since it is a branch of Gra lha khyung dgon, the two monasteries maintain
close ties. They send their novices to the monasteries of sNang zhig (No.180) and
rTogs Idan (No. 178) in rNga khog for ordination and further training
8/9. Rituals
The ritual cycle of dBal gsas from the 12th to the 19th day with a 'cham dance
from the 18th to the 20th day of the 1st month; the ritual cycle of Phur pa from the
15th to 19th day of the 4th month.
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery possesses one printed copy of Bonpo Kanjur and one printed
copy of Katen, one printed copy of Dri med gzi brjid and a few other texts.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery has no regular source of income and depends on donations from
its followers. The monks provide their own food.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of four villages: Byer chu with thirty-eight
families, rDi mi with twelve families, mGar rdo with sixteen families and 'Gram
with three families.
13. Local festivals
There is a sacred mountain (gnas ri) which was originally a Bonpo site and
which was believed to be an abode of gShen Iha 'od dkar. However, since most of
the region's population were converted to Buddhism, the Buddhists began to regard
it as the abode of Thugs rje chen po or sPyan ras gzigs. The Bonpo, however, still
circumambulate the mountain.
14. Occupation of the local people
Farmers
Sources
(1) Interviews in autumn 1998 with sTag la skyabs (b.1935), Shes rab tshul khrims
(b.1930), Bla ma skyabs (b.1943), all three monks at the monastery, and with
569



Nor bu thar (b.1942) and Gyal ba (b.1947), both laymen
(2) Texts:
- an anonymous untitled history of the monastery, MS
-rNga khul chu chen rdzong gi bzod sgom dgon pa'i lo rgyus mdor bsdu in
rNga khul gyi dgon pa'i lo rgyus, The Religion Bureau and the Buddhist
Association of Nga pa Prefecture, MS, pp.220-224



County Seat
District Seat
'Bar-khams
Township Seat
Administrative Village
| Phim-thun
da znas, Chyla-kremozed-spom
Rya-shad
Thugs-rje chen-po'i zam-kha
•
Monastery
Dzam-thang County
Kye-mo
- Con
thesar
Tabloid)
Mountain
County Border
Township Border
River
Road
Footpath
Drug-zur as
biom- brus
dralbankbans de
Kha-ra-kyo
Cabelo
syra-gar
1/640,000
Thum
10
Ching-oying
A-la-shoga
Sa-bar-kyo.
zhug thur
Sabaty
gsal
Chu-chen
Chu - chen
County
Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions In Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
Do-gsum
Kha-ra-thang
a-blon
Mong-brak
gYung-drung Ihasten
SPA-nying
Rong-brag County
Mar-spang-



(187) gYung drung Iha steng Monastery
(188) mTsho mtho Monastery



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(189) Gra lha khyung Monastery
(190) Bla med Monastery
573



(191) bZod sgom Monastery
574



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
rMe ba county
Me ba (Hong Yuan in Chinese) county is located in rNga ba Tibetan
Autonomous Prefecture, Sichuan Province. There are 39 villages divided bewteen
12 Townships and 6 state farms in the county. The area is 8,478 sq km. The
population is 26,060 (17,701 of whom were Tibetans in 1980). The county seat is
Khyung mchu, 190 km from 'Bar khams, the capital of Nga ba Prefecture.
(192) Mag gsar Temple
1. Name
The temple (gsas khang) has three names: Mag gsar khyung po g-yung drung
gling, Mag gsar khyung po dar rgyas gling and gSang sngags smin grol theg chen
gling
2. Location
The temple is located in 3 km northwest of Kyang mchu, the seat of rMe ba
county.
3. History
The nomads of Mag gsar, a village in Chu khog town of Reb gong county,
rMa lho Prefecture, migrated to the present site of rMe ba only decades ago. The
nomadic community was an important sponsor of the temple in Mag gsar village in
Reb gong until the last decade of the 20th century.
In 1993 'Jam dpal rdo rje (b.1950) founded Mag gsar Khyung po g-yung drung
gling as a branch of the temple in Reb gong mentioned above. Since Mar gsar
village in Reb gong traditionally paid hommage to Gong thang, a lama of Bla brang
Monastery, the temple's official proprietor (dgon bdag) is still Gong thang, although
'Jam dpal rdo rje is the founder of the temple.
4.
Hierarchical sytem
-dgon bdag, head of the temple
-dbu mdzad (replaced every three years)
- one dge skos (replaced each year)
- two gnyer pa (with no predetermined term of office)
5. Current number of residents
There are one hundred and forty-five tantric practitioners (sngags pa) at the
temple fifty of whom form the main group for the temple's annual rituals.
575



6. Current education
The system is similar to that of the gsas khang in Reb gong (c/ Nos 101-115).
All the practitioners are laymen and only go to the temple to perform the annual
rituals. The younger practitioners are trained by the elder ones.
7. Educational exchange
The temple is closely connected with four Bonpo reincarnations: Tshul chen
and Bon blon Nam mkha' bstan'dzin of rTogs Idan Monastery (No.178) in rNga
khog, Bọn brgya de legs Thun grub rgya mtsho of Bon brgya Monastery (No.100)
in Reb gong and sMon rgyal Iha sras of dBal khyung Monastery (No.155) in Nyag
rong.
8/9. Rituals
- Ist month: prayer for the deads based on the skye sgo gcod pa from the 7th to
the 13th day
- 5th month: the ritual cycle of sNang srid zhu chen from the 10th to the 14th
day
- 9th month: the Zhi khro cycle from the 1st to the 5th day
- 7th month: the ritual cycle based on the Tshe dbang bod yul ma on the 10th
day
- 10th month: the ritual cycle of dBal gsas from the 22nd to the 25th day (the
local name for the ritual INga mchod suggests Buddhist influence)
- 12th month: the dgu gtor rite from the 22nd to the 29th day
There is a special ritual for the village which is performed by both Bonpo and
Nying ma pa tantries together in the gsas khang during the 5th month for several
days, which includes the ritual cycle of sPyi 'dul performed by the Bonpos and
rituals of Ma mo and mGon po performed by the rNying ma pa.
10. Books heeld in the temple
The gsus khang has three printed copies of the Bonpo Kanjur and one printed
copy of Katen, the edition of bsTan pa'i nyi ma.
12. Income and expenses
The temple has no regular source of income and depends on offerings from its
followers
13. Local festivals
There are four la btsax dedicated to the local deities: A skya, Seskong, gYu
skod and dMag dpon. The the deities propitiation takes place on the 15th day of the
7th month and is attended by the local lay communities.
576



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
14. Occupation of the local people
They are nomads.
Sources
(1) Interview in autumn 1998 with 'Jam dpal rdo rje (b.1950)
(2) Texts:
- Mag gsar khyung po g-yung drung gling ngam theg chen gling girnam thar
by 'Jam dpal rdo rje, MS, composed in 1999
-rNga ba khul gvi hung yon rdzong gi dmag gsar bon dgon gvi lo rgyus mdor
bsdus, NKGL, pp. 12-13
(193) Tsha lung Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is Tsha lung rNam rgyal bsam gtan ling, or sTag
lung ram rgyal bsam gtan ling. It is also known as Tsha lung sTag tshang.
2. Location
The monastery is located 90 km southwest of Khyung mchu, seat of the rMe ba
county.
3. History
The monastery was founded by Bya chen Nyi ma 'dzin in the Fire-Horse year
of the 3rd Rab byung (1186). He was a son of Do 'phags chen po, the founder of
sNang zhig Monastery (No. 180) in Nga khog.
Following is a list of Bya chen Nyi ma 'dzin's descendants and successors :
1. Bya chen Nyi ma dzin
2. dBang phyug rin chen
3. sMin grol rgyal mtshan
4. bSlab gsum tshul khrims
5. mKhas btsun kun bzang
6. rNam grol rinchen
7. Drung mu bstan 'dzin
8. mKhas mchog Ihun grub
9. ba Tan 'dzin 'od zer
10. Gyal ba bsam gtan
11. mkhyen brtse bstan pa
12. rNam grolrin chen
13. gYung drung bstan dbang



14. bsTan 'dzin dar rgyas
15. Dza rong Nyi ma bstan'dzin
16. gYung drung tshul khrims
17. Grags pa bzang po
18. Gyal ba
19. Rin chen Ihun grub
20. Tshul khrims rgyal mtshan
21. Nam mkha' tshul khrims
22. Dza rong Nam mkharin chen
The 22nd in the line is the present master of the monastery. He was seriously
ill when I visited the monastery in autumn 1998, and I was told that he was training
skal bzang shes rab (b.1982), his son, to be his successor. The monastery was razed
during the Cultural Revolution and was rebuilt in the 1980s.
4. Hierarchical system
-dgon bdag, hereditary
- one dbu mdzad
- one rgan pa
- one dge skos
- one mchod g-yog
The incumbents, with the exception of the dgon bdag, are replaced every three
years.
5. Current number of monks
There were thirty-five novices and monks at the monastery in 1998.
6. Current education
There are no organized classes. The young novices are trained by the elder
monks.
7. Educational exchange
For the above-mentioned historical reasons, the monastery is connected with
sNang zhig (No.180) and is still responsible for Tsha lung, and the monks go there
for further training and ordination.
8/9. Rituals
Margyud from the 4th to the 7th day, followed by smon lam from the 8th to
the 15th day of the 1st month (with Byams pa gling skor festival on the 15th day);
rNam rgyal stong mchod from the 4th to 9th day of the 4th month; the summer fast
(dbyar gnas) from the 14th to the 21st day of the 6th month; Atonement ritual for the
578



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
religious protectors (srung ma'i tshogs 'don) is from the 1st to the 6th day of the 9th
month
11. Income and expenses
The monastery has no regular source of income and depends on offerings from
the faithful. The monks provide their own food.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of four villages: Ba kha so ma of Chu kha ru
community with twelve families, Ba kha mying ba of Chu kha ru community with
eleven families, Brag ris ma village with fourteen families and Shing bzo ba kha
village with sixteen families.
13. Local festivals
The mountain behind the monastery is called bТsan mkhar and is associated
with a local deity called bТsan A bse. He is propitiated by both monks and lay
followers on the 2nd day of the 1st month.
There is a sacred mountain known as Tsha ri gYung drung dgra 'dul 8 km west
of the monastery that was sanctified by rTogs ldan bSod nams phun tshogs, a master
of rTogs Idan Monastery (No.178) in rNga khog. It is propitiated by both monks and
lay followers on the 15th day of the 6th month.
14. Occupation of the local population
Farmers
Sources
(1) Interviews with the following monks at the monastery in autumn 1998: Dza rong
Nam mkha'rin chen (b.1938), Tshul khrims ye shes (b.1930), Dza rong skal
bzang shes rab (b.1982)
(2) Texts:
- sTag lung rnam rgyal bsam gtan gling gi bstan 'yung bkra shis bde legs kun
'byung by Nam mkha' tshul khrims, MS
- Nga ba khul hung yon rdzong gi tsha lung dgon pa'i lo rgyus mdor bsdus in
NKHGL pp.7-8
579



teamDzod-dge County,
County Seat
District Seat
Township Seat
Administrative Village
Monastery
County Border
Township Border
River
Road
Footpath
JA-mo
1/840,000
sMag-gsar
Lung-ringer
mbi Khyung-mchu
A-mchog phyags-ra
rNga-ba
A-mchog
a County
Na
Zung-chu County
(Shar-khop)
Tsha-lungo
T
sho-bzhi
Tsho-bzhi
Lung-zi
Lung-zi
Dar-lung Scibelse
Tsha-tung
@gDong-brgyad
Khro-chu County
'Bar-khams County
SSSS
Siis
580



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(192) Mag gsar Temple
(193) Tsha lung Monastery
581



mDzod dge county
mDzod dge county belongs to rNga ba Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture
in Sichuan Province. The county seat is located at Tag tsha dgon. The county
comprises 16 districts xiang with 86 villages. The county covers an area of 10,203
sq km. The population is 50,459, 41,444 of whom were Tibetans in 1980. There are
six Bonpo monasteries in the county.
(194) A skyid Kyang tshang Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is A skyid skyang tshang gYung drung bstan rgyas
gling.
2. Location
The monastery is located 41 km northeast of the county town, the seat of
mDzod dge county. There is a motorable road leading to the monastery
3. History
Dri med 'od zer believes (DzNGL pp. 112-114) that the first master of the
monastery was syang 'phags, one of the Three Saints of Amdo (phags pa rnam
gsum), who lived in the 2nd Rab byung (1087-1146). He first founded a hermitage
known as Bon po'i bde khug.
sKyang 'phags had two sons, Thog rgod and Thogs med. Practitioners began to
gather together at the hermitage. Following is a list of the masters who preached at
the hermitage:
1. sKyang 'phags
2. Thog rgod and Thogs med
3. Gyal mtshan dpal bzang. This master reorganized the hermitage.
4. bSod nams bstan'dzin. This master built a temple below the hermitage and
living quarters around it.
5. Khri gtsug bstan 'dzin
6. Mi'gyur gtsug phud
7. bsTan 'dzin dbang rgyal
8. Rin chen 'od zer
9. Gyal ba bstan'dzin
10. Khri rgyal grags bzang. During the time of this master, tantric practitioners
lived in the hermitage, also a few monks.
11. sKyang bla bsTan 'dzin phun tshogs. This master with the help of Gling
zhig rGyal ba blo gros extended the hermitage into a small monastery by
582



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
building an assembly hall (du khang) in the 7th Rab byung (1387-1446).
12. g Yung drung bstan 'dzin
13. Sod nams rgyal mtshan
14. sKyang bladBang ldan grags pa. This master enlarged the monastery after
it merged with the monasteries of Dar rgyal Iha rtse and Phag rgod (DzNGL
p. 113). He renamed the monastery A skyid gYung drung bstan rgyas gling
He insisted on the strict observance of monastic discipline.
15. bsTan pa 'od zer
16. Rin chen Ihun grub
17. g Yung drung ye shes 'od gsal alias Byang chub rin chen, a renowned
physician, popularly known as A byang tshang
18. Nam mkha' hun grub. During the time of this master the monastery was
burned down.
19. Nam mkha' bstan'dzin and skyang dbon Rin chen rgyal mtshan. The
second rebuilt the monastery and also elaborated the rules of the monastery
He established the ritual of offering known as Klong rgyas mchod pa with
the 'cham dance according to the tradition of Sangs rgyas gling pa during
the 1st month.
20. bsTan pa grags dbang and Nam mkha' mi'gyur gtsug rgyan
21. gTsug gshen rgyal ba. According to Dri med od zer, he recognized the
famous writer skyang sprul Nam mkha'rgyal mtshan as the reincarnation
of Nam mkha' bstan 'dzin. g Tsug gshen rgyal ba was contemporary with
rGyal ba g-yung drung phun tshogs alias A tshogs tshang who was a
famous master. He was born in sTag ra village in the bo and was regarded
as the emanation of sKyang 'phags and took up residence in sk yang tshang
Monastery. Before he came to the monastery he is said to have studied at
'Bras spungs where he obtained the rab 'byams pa degree. He was also
invited by the kings of Lung dgu. Khro skyabs in Gyal rong, and the
monastery has preserved some of the valuable gifts he received from them.
22. sKyang tshang Gya nag sprul sku skal bzang mkhas grub alias A mkhas
tshang who greatly supported the monasteries rTswa ring (No.98) and Sam
'grub (No.197).
23. Nyi ma bstan'dzin. Because he died very young, he is called s Prul chung
24. gYung drung rgyal mtshan alias Nam mkha' dbang phyug, also known as
Gya nag sprul sku rNal 'byor ba
25. Nam mkha' rin chen alias bs Tan 'dzin rin chen rnam rgyal (b.1880) was
born in Khang sar village of A skyid in mDzod dge. He was a very learned
master and wrote a number of works.
26. skal bzang sangs rgyas bstan 'dzin (1905-1961) was born in 'Jam pa village
of Thang smad community in the A skyid area of mDzod dge.
583



27. Dri med 'od zer (6.1935) is the present head of the monastery. He was born
in Pe chung village in sTeng ka, The bo. He is a great Bonpo scholar and is
also renowned in the area as a physician in Tibetan medicine. In addition to
running the monastery, he works at mDzod dge Tibetan Medicine Hospital
and has received several official titles for his social service.
The monastery was reconstructed in the 1980s.
4. Hierarchical system
- one bla ma
- one dbu mdzade
- one dge skos
- one dngul bdag
- one rtsis pa
DIE
5. Current number of monks
There are twenty-six novices and monks at the monastery.
6. Current education
There are no organized classes. The young novices are trained by the elder
monks. The monastery often organizes public teachings.
7. Educational exchange
The monastery maintains close ties with Chags ri (No.94), rTswa ring and
bSam grub monasteries in The bo county, and with Nyos zhing (No.195) and du
skyang (No.196) monasteries in mDzod dge county, but their educational exchanges
are not regular.
8/9. Rituals
- 1st month: commemoration of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan on the 5th
day, the ritual based on the Klong rgyas from the 6th to the 15th day with a
'cham dance on the 15th day
- 2nd month: the cycle of the Yi dam kun 'dus from the 13th to the 22nd day
- 3rd 4th months: the ritual cycle of Phur pa from the 21st day of the to the 1st
day of the 4th month; the recitation of Ma tri and Du tri su alternately, starting
on the 18th day of the 4th month
- 5th month: commemoration of sKyang 'phags from the 21st to the 22nd day
- 6th month: the observance of the summer fast (dbyar gnas) from the 9th to the
15th and the renewal ceremony of the la btsas on the following day
- 7th month: general religious service (zhabs brtan) from the 13th to the 15th
day
584



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
- 8th month: the observance of the bsnyen gnas abstinence and the smyung gnas
fasting from the 14th to the 15th day
- 9th month: whitewashing ceremony (dkar rtsi) of the assembly hall's inner
walls on the 21st and 22nd day
- 10th month: the ritual based on the Klong rgyas on the 14th and 15th days
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has three printed copies of Kanjur, two printed copies of Katen,
printed copies of the collected works of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan and
Shar rdza bra shis rgyal mtshan, and more than two hundred texts in print and
manuscript, including a few Buddhist texts, dealing with rDzogs chen, ritual and
literature.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery has no regular source of income and depends on offerings from
the faithful.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of nine villages:
Tag gi gad mgo with ten families, A skyid stod with twenty-nine families,
A skyid grog with nine families, mDzo mgo thong rab with fifty-eight families in
two areas, Kyang ston with six families in mDzo mgo, Kyang skor with thirteen
families, De ba with thirty-four families, Thong rab sa la with twelve families and
Pan yon with four families.
13. Local festivals
There are four la btsas located at the top, middle and foot of the mountain
behind the monastery: the la btsas called Nor bu, below the banner at the summit,
skyang tshang la brsas half-way up the mountain, and finally the new la btsas (la
btsas gsar pa) and Grwa tshang la btsas at the foot of the mountain. The renewal
ceremony of the four la btsas traditionally took place on the 15th day of the 6th
month, but now the ceremony of skyang tshang la btsas is carried out on the 1st day
of the 1st month.
14. Occupation of the local people
Farming and trade
Sources
(1) Interview in autumn 1998 with Dri med 'od zer (b.1935), the most learned
Bonpo scholar in the area
585



(2) Texts:
- sTod skyang zhes su grags pa a skyid skyang tshang dgon bkra shis g-yung
drung dar rgyas gling gi byung ba cung zad brjod pa shel dkar me long by
Dri med od zer in mDzod dge'i bod brgyud nang bstan dgon sde so so'l lo
rgyus mdor bsdus, published by Srid gros mDzod dge rdzong u yon Ihan
khang rig gnas lo rgyus dpyad yig khang, September, 1999, pp. 111-217
(195) Nyos zhing Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is The brag Nyos zhing or The chu'i brag dkar bya
rgod dgon smin grol nor bu'i gling. It is also known as Nyi shar, because it is located
near a rock called Nyi shar brag. The most sacred mountain in the area, Brag dkar
bya sgod, is located immediately behind the monastery and thus the monastery is
also known as Brag dkar bya sgod.
2. Location
The monastery is located at the foot of Mount Brag dkar bya rgod, about 131
km north of sTag tsha, the seat of mDzod dge county.
3. History
The bo township of mDzod dge county is geographically and traditionally
part of The bo county in present day Kan lho Prefecture, Kansu Province. In the
13th Rab yung (1747-1806), at the time of gZa'ru Khro rgyal, the chief of the gZal
ru tribe, there was a village called Bon sde stod ma near gTso tshang Monastery
(No.91), whose religious gathering place was a temple of A skyid sk yang tshang
Monastery (No.194) in Ma ru village of gZa'ru tribe where a few monks lived,
known as Bon sde stod ma. But as the religious practitioners did not live according
to monastic vows, it was decided that the monastery should be moved to a more
isolated spot. Thus A tshogs tshang of A skyid sKyang tshang Monastery bought
the present site of the monastery in exchange for a white cow and other goods.
The new monastery was named Nyos zhing, literally "field that was bought". After
the monastery was completed, the monasteries of sKyang tshang, gTso tshang and
the local lay community decided that since it was Atshogs tshang who built the
monastery, it would remain a branch of skyang tshang Monastery, but that since it
was located nearer g Tso tshang, the latter would take charge of the monastery and
the chief of the local gZa' ru tribe would be the monastery's patron. The agreement
was committed to writing and signed by all parties. Thus Gyal ba g-yung drung
phun tshogs of skyang tshang and g Yung drung bstan 'dzin of g Tso tshang are
586



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
counted as the first of its patriarchs.
1. Gyal ba g-yung drung phun tshogs and g Yung drung bstan'dzin
2. gTso bla bSod nams phun tshogs alias Absod tshang
3. gTso bla bDe chen dbang 'dus
4. gTso bla bSod nams dbang grags
5. gTso dbon bsTan 'dzin dbang rgyal alias A khu bsTan rgyal tshang, also
known as gTso dbon rgan
6. gTso dbon Zla ba rgyal mtshan, a nephew of the 5th
7. g Tso dGra 'dul mgon po (1932-1971) was recognized as the rebirth of A
khu bsTan rgyal tshang by g Tso dbon Zla ba rgyal mtshan. He was the first
reincarnation of the monastery. The monastery was rebuilt in the 1980s. The
master appoints a bla ma to take care of the monastery in his absence. The
present head of Nyos zhing Monastery is Shes rab dbang rgyal. He is still
also the head of gTso tshang Monastery,
4. Hierarchical system
- one mkhan po
- one dbu mdzad (who also acts as dge skos, replaced every three years)
- three spyi ba (reappointed every three years)
5. Current number of monks
There are twenty-nine novices and monks at the monastery.
6. Current education
There no organized classes. The novices are trained by the elder monks.
7. Educational exchange
Since Nyos zhing was a branch of A skyid skyang tshang Monastery, both
monasteries maintain close ties. The monk students go to sKyang tshang for further
training and to take their ordination.
8/9. Rituals
Commemoration mNyam med chen po on the 4th and 5th days and the
recitation of the prayer (smon lam) from the 13th to the 15th day of the 1st month;
the ritual based on the Klong rgyas sgrub pa and the ritual cycle of Phur pa from the
11th to the 22nd day of the 4th month; ritual based on the rТsa gsum on the 21st and
22nd days of the 5th month.
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has one printed copy of Kanjur, one printed copy of Katen and
587



various other texts, including several works of Shar rdza Kra shis rgyal mtshan.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of seventeen villages in the vicinity of the
monastery: Bum pa with seven families, Tshal ru with nine families, Sog po with
five families, Shel gnag with fourteen families, rGu rab with eleven families, Gral
ring with thirteen families, Ther re with twelve families, E 'dzin with six families,
'Khor tshang with fifteen families, A grub with seven families, gSer with seven
families, Ra tshang with three families, gNas yag with five families, gZa' tshang
with four families, Gral mngon with six families, rDang du'u with three families and
Nub ru with three families.
13. Local festivals
The la btsas on the mountain behind the monastery is dedicated to the local
deity and its renewal ceremony is carried out by the monks on the 11th of the 4th
month.
The la btsas of De'u skyes is renewed by the lay people on the 4th day of the
Sth month and the la btsas of sTag chen on the 15th of the 5th month. The date for
the renewal ceremy of Nor bu rdzong la btsas is not fixed.
The most popular sacred mountain in the area is Mount Brag dkar bya sgod.
In Bonpo tradition, it is associated with the Zhi khro cycle. The mountain, which is
located immediately behind the monastery, was sanctified by sKyang 'phags Nyi ma
'od zer at the beginning of the 2nd Rab byung (1087-1146). Buddhists also regard
the mountain as sacred and associate it with bDe mchog. The mountain is venerated
by both Bonpo and Buddhist communities.
14. Occupation of the local people
Farming
Sources
(1) Interviews in autumn 1998 with skal bzang bstan pa (b.1971), a monk at the
monastery
(2) Texts:
- The chu'i brag dkar bya rgod dgon smin grol nor buli gling gi byung ba
mdor bsdus (The brag nyos zhing dgon in the catalogue) by Dri med 'od zer
in mDzod dge'i bod brgyud nang bstan dgon sde so so'i lo rgyus mdor bsdus,
published by Srid gros mDzod dge rdzong u yon lhan khang rig gnas lo rgyus
dpyad yig khang, September, 1999, pp.251-291
- an untitled account of the monastery's lha sde (local lay community) by the
administrative committee of Nyos zhing Monastery, MS
588



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
- mDzod dge rdzong gi sa cha'i ming brus by mDzod dge rdzong sa ming 'go
khrid tshan chung, 1986, p. 1
-A liturgical text concerned with bla ma, vi dam and mkha' 'gro, composed by
sKyang sprul Nam mkha'rgyal mtshan
(196) sGur skyang Monastery
1. Name
sGur skyang is the abbreviation of sGur ba sk yang tshang; the monastery's
full name is sur ba skyang tshang dgon mam rgyal kun grags gling, sGur ba is the
name of the valley where the monastery is located. It is also spelt du ba, because
the monastery faces a range of nine mountains collectively known as Go tshang spun
dgu, the "nine brothers of Go tshang mountain" (which is also the name of nine local
tribes).
2. Location
The monastery is located 61 km east of county town of mDzod dge.
3. History
A few years before the introduction of the Rab byung chronology that begins
with the year 1027, a Bonpo called skyang rtse Nyi ma grags pa opened a hermitage
near Sa ral village, west of Tsub ma'i la dmar on the flank of Mount Go tshang in
mDzod dge. Later, in the 1st Rab byung (1027-1086), his son 'Bum skyabs, who
was also called Kyang rtse tshang, built a temple at the hermitage which attracted
an increasing number of practitioners.
A brother of 'Bum skyabs known as Kyang rtse 'Phags pa skyabs was
regarded as a great saint. He is often called simply syang 'phags (DaNGL p.52). He
was one of the Three Bonpo Saints of Amdo and founded Thang zhing gYung drung
gling Monastery above Thang zhing village in the 2nd Rab byung (1087-1146). This
monastery was also known as Nyin ka Monastery.
bSod nams 'bum, the chief of sGur ba valley, built a residence for skyang
phags and his family, to ensure his family's descent and gave him seven families
to serve him. For this reason, skyang 'phags is regarded as the first master of all
the monasteries belonging to the skyang tshang lineage. In order to establish a real
monastery, Kyang 'phags chose a site known as Gling 'og, but it was not built in
his lifetime.
Following is a list of the masters in the skyang 'phags lineage:
1. sKyang 'phags
2. Thog rgod nam mkha'rgyal mtshan, one of three sons of syang 'phags.
589



moved the temple of Sa ral to Gling og and renamed it rNam rgyal lha
khang. The new complex became known as rNam rgyal kun grags gling or
more commonly as dGu ba syang tshang Monastery. He remained there as
head of the monastery, while Thogs med, his brother, married to continue the
hereditary succession.
3. Grags pa dbang rgyal (6.1148), founder of Sam 'grub Monastery (No.197)
4. gYung drung thos grol, moved rNam rgyal lha khang of Nyin ka and the
temple of Ra sngon 'bri sde from sTag ra to Gling 'og
5. Sod nams bzang po alias Gyal ba rgya mtsho, founder a monastery in Shar
khog (Zung chu) in the Iron-Tiger year of the 15th Rab byung (1290)
6. Rin chen blo gros, built a temple dedicated to the Eighty Saints in the
monastery and also supervised skyang tshang Monastery (No.202) in Shar
khog
7. bDud 'dul dbang grags
8. gYung drung bstan rgyal
9.dKon mchog yon tan
10.rNam rgyal thogs med
The last four (7-10) masters also looked after sKyang tshang monastery in
Shar khog.
11. Nam rgyal bstan'dzin, also active in Chu nag valley (which now belongs
to the Nine Villages of gZi tsha)
12. gTsug phud tshul khrims, founder a small monastery called mGon po near
Tshal rang village in the rTa ra dri ri area in the lower reaches of the chu
river
13. Nyi ma 'bum. He wanted the practitioners in the monastery to observe strict
monastic discipline but was unable to impose it in his lifetime.
14. Shes rab rgyal mtshan, went to sMan ri Monastery (No. 1) in gTsang with
several companions to order to receive ordination and when he returned
to the monastery, he imposed strict monastic discipline following his
predeccesor's wishes. He also built a temple called Dri med khang bzang in
Thang zhing for those practitioners who did not wish to take monastic vows
immediately.
15. Seng ge gling grags, built a residence for the skyang 'phags lineage at dGa'
Idan hermitage in Bab bzo, founded by sKyang 'phags and initiated the
tradition of sending a master from sGur skyang to the hermitage.
16. gYung drung bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan, travelled to Central Tibet for several
years and reinforced monastic discipline in the monastery. He helped dBang
Idan grags pa of A skyid skyang tshang monastery (No.194) to move Dar
rgyas lha rtse, Phag rgod establishments to gYung drung bstan rgyas gling
and developed close ties between A skyid and sGur skyang monasteries.
590



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
17. Nam mkha' ye shes built a temple in each of the following places: 'Azha,
sTag ra and Nyag ra, with the intention of founding monasteries there.
18. Kun bzang Ihun grub, built a temple at the monastery dedicated to Kun
bzang rgyal ba'dus pa
19. gYung drung thun grub, built a temple in IDong ti and also founded Tag
skyong Monastery (No.211) in Tsub ma which now belongs to the Nine
Villages of gZi tsha county
20. Ngag dbang bstan 'dzin
21. Rin chen rgyal mtshan, born in the 17th century. He enlarged the assembly
hall ('du khang) and renamed the monastery dPal gshen bstan g.yung drung
rgyal mtshan kun grags gling. He also completed the construction of Tag
skyong Monastery.
22. Nam mkha' khri rgyal, built a temple in the monastery for the purposes of
tantric rituals
23. gYung drung gtsug rgyan
24. Khri gtsug rgyal ba
25. gYung drung bdud 'dul
26. Khri rgyal grags pa
27. g Yung drung bstan pa
28. Tshul khrims bstan'dzin
29. Nam mkha'rin chen
30. gYung drung shes rab bstan'dzin (b.1916)
The monastery was accidently destroyed by fire in 1950 and was rebuilt shortly
after at its present site;
31. Rin chen rgyal mtshan (b.1976)
In 1982, the monastery was allowed to reopen. Although during the Cultural
revolution the assembly hall served as a granary, the Kyang 'phags's residence as a
school and the temple devoted to the tantric rituals as the school's kitchen, the local
government returned all the buildings to the monks and the monastery was restored.
4. Hierarchical system
-dgon bdag, hereditary
- one grwa tshang bla ma (replaced every three years)
- one dbu mdzad (replaced every three years)
- two dge skos (replaced every three years)
- sixteen spyi ba
The spyi ba sponsor the monastery's annual rituals: four spyi ba for the ritual of
Ma tri'i sgrub mchod, two spyi ba for the ritual cycle of dByar gnas, two spyi ba for
the ritual based on the Klong rgyas, two spyi ba for the recitation ritual of Du tri su,
three spyi ba for the Yi dam kun 'dus, three spyi ba for the ritual cycle of Phur ba, all
591



of whom are replaced each year.
h
5. Current number of monks
There are twenty-three novices and monks at the monastery.
6. Current education
The youg novices are trained by the elder monks. The monastery organizes
public teachings and the monks also go to other monasteries for further teachings.
7. Educational exchange
There are seven monasteries historically related to the skyang 'phags lineage
and in many ways they remain closely connected to each other.
8/9. Rituals
The monks of the monastery go to tTag skyong Monastery to perform the smon
lam ceremony together with the monks there from the 6th to the 9th day of the 1st
month; they go to Sam 'grub Monastery (No.197) of Phan chu in Bab bzo for the
smon lam ceremony from the 12th to the 14th day of the 1st month; the g To srung
ritual from the 11th to the 15th day of the 2nd month together with bSam 'grub
Monastery in Bab bzo, rTag skyong Monastery and Ko dgon Monastery in 'Azha;
the ritual cycle of the Yi dan kun dus from the 2nd to the 11th day of the 3rd month;
the ritual based on the Du tri su for Nyag ra village in s Tag ra gong ma from the
10th to the 19th day of the 4th month (the monks go to the village on the 7th day and
spend the following two days preparing for the ritual and return to the monastery
on the 29th day); the ritual based on Klong rgyas in the 5th month; the smmer fast
(dbyar gnas) from the 10th to the 16th day of the 6th month; the gTo srung ritual
from the 12th to the 15th day of 7th month; the Klong rgyas ritual from the 8th to the
12th day of the 8th month.
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has one printed copy of Kanjur and one printed copy of Katen.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery has no regular source of income and depends on offerings from
the faithful. The monks provide their own food.
12. Local community
The local lay community (Tha sde) consists of fifteen families in Yul gsum
community: Shing bzo with six families; De'u khag with seven families; gYi
tshang with two families, four villages in Sa ral community: skyang skor, Tsho
592



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
bzhi, dPal rtse and Ar ma (twenty-seven families altogether): two villages in Phu
ba community: sTag "ban with nine families and sGa phrug with six families; four
villages in mDo ba community: 'Brug dge with five families, Khargan with two
families, ko tshang with two families and Wa thang with one family; three villages
in Bar mtshams community: 'Bre sde with four families, sGa phrug with four
families and skya yon with four families; three villages in Thang zhing community:
Myirtsa with six families, Mye rngu with two families and Yag tsa with nine
families.
13. Local festivals
The mountain behind the monastery is called Nor bu spungs brjid and is
associated with the eponymous deity; it was sanctified by skyang 'phags g Yung
drung thos grol, the 4th in the skyang 'phags lineage. The festival of its veneration
takes place on the 13th day of the 3rd month. The la btsas was burned down in 1950,
but was reconstructed in the following year by gYung drung shes rab bstan'dzin, the
30th master of the sGur skyang lineage.
14. Occupation of the local people
Agriculture
Sources
(1) Interviews in autumn 1998 with: Dri med od zer (b.1935), bs Tan 'dzin phun
tshogs (b.1933), dBang Idan (b.1934) and A do (b.1949)
(2) Texts:
- Gur ba'i skyang tshang dgon rnam rgyal kun grags gling gi byung ba brjod
pa dbyar mnga sgradbyangs by Dri med od zer in DzNGL pp.51-110
(197) gYung drung bsam 'grub Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is gYung drung bsam 'grub dgon nor bu'i gling.
2. Location
The monastery is located 53 km southeast of county town of mDzod dge.
3. History
bSam 'grub Monastery has preserved records of its masters as follows:
1. Grags pa dbang rgyal (b.1148), the 3rd skyang 'phags. He came to a small
monastery called Rol 'ong in 'Brug lung where resided until his death. The
593



establishment later developed into proper monastery which became known
as bSam 'grub.
2. Ye shes rgyal
mtshan
3. Ye shes rgyal ba
4. bs Tan 'dzin blo gros
5. Shes rab bstan 'dzin
6. bs Tan 'dzin dbang ldan
7. 'Dul ba bstan 'dzin rgyal mtsho alias Tshul khrims
8. bsTan pa 'brug grags
The reincarnation of the 6th in the line, was born towards the end of the 10th
Rab byung (1567-1626). He built five temples in the monastery dedicated to each
of the following practices: rituals of Klong rgyas tshogs chen, Ma rgyud and Khro
bo. He also founded other monasteries in three different places: gSer khang in dPal
skyid, Thang nag in IDong spe and brDa rnga in Kyang tsha. At that time, however,
Rol 'ong Monastery and Bya khyung Monastery fell into decline, and he therefore
founded bSam 'grub Monastery combining both monasteries in the middle of the
11th Rab byung (1627-1686).
9. bsTan 'dzin rgyal mtshan
10. Shes rab bstan pa dar rgyas
11. Tshul khrims rgyal mtshan (1823-1888)
12. Shes rab bstan rgyas (1889-1931) alias rNam rgyal ye shes, or locally
known as A shes; he was regarded as the reincarnation of the 11th in the
line.
13. Shes rab rgyal mtshan (1889-1959) alias g Yung drung bkra shis
14. mChog grub dpal bzang (b. 1948), the present head of the monastery
The monastery did not survive during the Cultural Revolution and was rebuilt
by mChog grub dpal bzang in 1984-1997.
4. Hierarchical system
- two trulku
- one grwa tshang bla ma (with no predetermined term of office)
- one dbu mdzad (replaced every two years)
- one dge skos (replaced every two years)
- one spyi ba (replaced every two years)
5. Current number of monks
There are forty-two novices and monks at the monastery.
6. Current education
There are no organized classes. The young novices are trained by the elder
594



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
monks.
7. Educational exchange
It has close ties with all the monasteries founded by the masters of the skyang
'phags lineage.
8/9. Rituals
Commemoration of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mishan from the 3rd to the 5th
day of the 1st month, the offering of Me tog mchod pa and the ritaul cycle of Khro
bo from the 6th to the 16th day of the same month; the ritual cycle of Phur ba and
the ritual based on the rТsa gsum bon skyong bzhi sbrag from the 10th to the 22nd
day of the 4th month; ritual based on the risa gsum kun 'dus mchog sgrub for the
commemoration of skyang sprul Nam mkha'rgyal mtshan from the 21st to the 23rd
day of the 5th month; the summer fast (dbyar gnas) in the 6th month.
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has more than two hundred volumes of works including the
Kanjur and Katen.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery has no regular source of income and depends on offerings from
the faithful. The monks provide their own food.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of three comunitis: Ma' nyin community
has three vilages: Do rdza with three families, mChod rdza with seven families and
dPal skyid with four families. Lug lung community has three villages: The bo with
two families, Grags bu with two families, Kha ska with seventeen families, plus two
single families: 1Cags phyung and Do skyabs. Tag le community has nine villages:
rDo gla, dPal skyid and sKya skor with thirty-three families altogether; Sam yas
village with seven families, Gro thang with sixteen families, dBen yul with ten
famlies, rMo'u ngo with six families, Cong ro with eleven families and sGrub lung
with seven families
13. Local festivals
The renewal ceremony of the la brsas called Grwa chung and located on the
mountain behind the monastery is performed by the monks on the 11th day of the
4th month.
dPa' bo la btsas is dedicated to the local deity and is renewed by the lay
community on the 11th day of the 4th month.
595



14. Occupation of the local people
Agriculture
Sources
(1) Interviews in autumn 1998 with Dri med 'od zer (b.1935) and Shes rab gong
'phel (b.1967), a monk at the monastery
(2) Texts:
- mDzod dge rdzong bab bzo yul tsho'i g-yung drung bsam 'grub dyon nor bu'i
gling gi lo rgyus mdo tsam by bSam 'grub do dam tshan khag, DzNGL pp.
236-243
(198) mDa' chen Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is mDachen Dar rgyas gling or mDa' chen dgon
gYung drung bshad sgrub dar rgyas gling. It is also called Shel phug skyang tshang,
2. Location
The monastery is located 76 km southeast of the county town of mDzod dge.
3. History
According to Hun grub bstan'dzin (DzNGL p. 226), Kyang 'phags Nam
mkha' g-yung drung, born in the Iron-Bird year of the 1st Rab byung (1081),
established two hermitages, sGon sTag nang and dGaston that gradually became
sKyang Shel phug, a residence of the masters of the skyang 'phags lineage, hence
the monastery's second name Shel phug skyang tshang. Although the skyang
'phags lineage in mDa' chen Monastery has survived to this day, the sources
concerning its history are no longer available, and the dates of many of the masters
remain unknown. Following is a list of the masters of mDa' chen 'og ma, the
Lower mDa' chen" lineage who looked after the monastery:
1. sKyang 'phags Nam mkha' g-yung drung
2. Rang grol Bla ma rgyal mtshan
3. Gling zhig Shes rab g-yung drung
4. Gling zhig rGyal ba bstan'dzin
5. Gling zhig rNam rgyal grags pa
6. Tshul khrims rgyal mtshan
7. Rin chen rgyal mtshan
8. Nam mkha' ye shes
9.bSod nams ye shes
596



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
10. gYung drung phun tshogs
11. Shes rab 'od zer
12. Nam mkha' rin chen
13. Nam rgyal grags pa
14. Nam mkha' bstan 'dzin
15. sKyang tshang Bla ma gtsug gshen
16. sKyang tshang gYung drung gtsug rgyan
17. sKyang sprul Nam mkha'rgyal mtshan
18. Sod nams rgyal mtshan
19. bSod nams bstan'dzin and Phun tshogs rnam rgyal
20. Nyi ma rgyal mtshan
21. gYung drung kun khyab
22. Khro bo rgyal mtshan
23. Shes rab dbang rgyal
In addition to the above-mentioned lineage, there is another lineage known
as mDa' chen kha ma, "the Upper mDa' chen" that originated in the dar mo
Hermitage of the monastery founded by Nam mkha' bstan 'dzin, the fourteenth
master. The succesion of this lineage is as follows:
1. Nam mkha'bstan'dzin, the fourteenth
2. sKyang sprul Nam mkha'rgyal mtshan, the seventeenth
3. Rin chen rgyal mtshan
4. Nam mkha'rgyal po
5. A drung
6. Tshul khrims bstan'dzin
7. bsTan 'dzin dbang rgyal and Lung rtogs skal bzang rgya mtsho (DzNGL
pp.227-229)
The mDa'chen 'og ma is regarded as more important than mDa' chen kha ma,
because its lineage is the original lineage of the monastery, whereas mDa' chen kha
ma is an offshoot of the latter. However, all the masters of both successions had
equal roles in the monastery. The assembly hall ('du khang) survived the Cultural
Revolution, although not the statues and thangkas within were destroyed. The
monastery was officially reopened and its reconstruction undertaken in 1982.
4. Hierarchical system
- two incarnated lamas
-one grwa tshang bla ma
- one dbu mdzad
- one dge skos
- one spyi ba
All the incumbents are replaced every two or three years with the exception of
597



the dgon bdag.
5. Current number of monks
There are one hundred novices and monks in the monastery
6. Current education
There are no organized classes. The young novices are trained by the elder
monks.
8/9. Rituals
Commemoration of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan, Phur pa for eleven
days, the gYung drung klong rgyas for ten days, ritual based on the Zlas chog rin
chen sgron ma occasionally, the Rigs drug rang sbyong for seven days, Ma rgyud for
two days, commemoration of sKyang sprul Nam mkha' rgyal mtshan for three days,
the smyung gnas fasting for two days, the dbyar gnas fasting for two days.
There are five ja shog, "tea communties", each ja shog in turn offers tea during
retreats in the monastery for fifteen days, the anniversary of sKyang sprul Nam
mkha'rgyal mtshan for three days and the dgu gtor rite for nine days.
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has two printed copies of Kanjur and one printed copy of
Katen (bsTan pa'i nyi ma's edition), one copy of Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan's
collected works and one printed copy of Kyang sprul Nam mkha'rgyal mtshan's
collected works.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery has no regular source of income and depends on offerings from
its followers.
12. Local community
The local lay community of the monastery consists of Bab bzo, Thang skor
and Cog tshang communities, collectively known as Zhing yul pa, and divided into
five villages: rTswa sa gzhung with twenty-one families, Zam kha with ten families,
Khang ri sgang with seven families, Lung zhing nang with nine families and Ne'u
gsing lam 'og with thirteen families.
Bras sde, rTsi nag bu geig and dPal rtse communities, collectively known as
Sha mo khag and also divided into five villages: Bab bzo tshang with forty-three
families, Ra dge with fourteen families, Nyag nyi with thirty-four families, mKhar
smad with thirty families and Zhing 'khyil with ten families. 'Bras sde and Ngang
rab communities, collectively known as Chu tshal shog: Ka tsi with forty-one
598



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai. Gansu and Sichuan
families and Ngang rab thirty-one families; 'Khrungs sa with thirty-two families.
14. Occupation of the local people
Agriculture
Sources
(1) Interview in autumn 1998: Dri med 'od zer (b.1935), the present head of A skyid
sKyang tshang Monastery (No.194) and the most learned Bonpo scholar in the
area
(2) Texts:
- Bab bzo mda'chen dgon g-yung drung bshad sgrub dar rgyas gling gi lo
rgyus nyung bsdus dwangs gsal me long by Shel phug lHun grub bstan 'dzin,
DzNGL pp. 218-235
599



District Seat
Township Seat
Administrative Village
Monastery
The-bois
22-dge.
khoe
- County Border
- Township Border
- River
H. Road
---- Footpath
1/720,000
gZa'-rug i
Nyos-zhing But pa
thog
The-bo County
mozod
A-skyld
A-skyld skyang-sayang
Gro-tshang
A-skyld-roage Yag-gsum
Chos-rje
pur-skyang
Gurbe
dPal-skyid_
sTag-tsha
Samgrub
PEOS 04 -
county
Bab-bzo
Kar-mo
Dafhen
gzi-tsha sde-dgu
rMe-ba County
Zung-chu County
(shar-khong)



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(194) A skyld skyang tshang Monastery, Plate 1
601



(194) A skyid skyang tshang Monastery, Plate 2 Dri med od zer (b.1935),
the twenty-seventh master of the skyang tshang lineage at the
monastery
602



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
(196) Gur skyang Monastery
(197) gYung drung bsam grub Monastery
603



(198) mDa' chen Monastery
604



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
Zung chu County
Zung chu (Zing/Zong) county, also known as Shar khog, is located in rNga ba
(rNga khog) Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture, Sichuan Province. There are 142
villages divided between 26 townships in the county. The total area is 8,400 sq km.
The population is 59,544 (19,960 of whom were Tibetans in 1986). The county seat
is Cin An, 431 km from 'Bar khams, the capital of Nga ba Prefecture.
Zung chu county is named after a river which takes its source near Kun dga', a
mountain located in gSal chu township. The river is a tributary of the Yangtze river
and is around 711 km in length.
(199) Na steng Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is sNa steng bra shis g-yung drung gling also
known as Cags mdud dgon.
2. Location
The monastery is located by the road, 8 km north of Songpan, the seat of Zung
chu county.
3. History
The first master of the sNang zhig lineage of sNang zhig Monastery (No. 180)
in Nga khog, Do 'phags chen po (b.1028), had three sons: Nyi ma 'dzin, 'Dul ba
rgyal mtshan and gYung drung rgyal mtshan (alias Shes rab 'od zer), the younger
brothers, migrated to Shar khog. There 'Dul ba rgyal mtshan established a family
considered sacred (gdung brgyud) with the name of Cags mdud situated to the
east of the river and below the village of A gling. The family temple which he built
became his main residence and was called sNang zhig ICags mdud dgon (NKGL
p.99). Later the temple was extended into a small monastery. The family was famous
for its possession of an old silver image of the Bonpo sage Dran pa nam mkha'
known as Cags mdud dngul sku, "the Silver image of the ICags mdud family".
gYung drung rgyal mtshan, the brother of 'Dul ba rgyal mtshan, died at the age of
twenty-four leaving two sons: gYung drung bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan and Sam 'grub.
While the elder brother looked after the monastery and the younger brother ensured
the lineage's continuity.
Shar khog is an area where Bon religion has always been the dominant tradition
and where the gdung brgyud system has been the most prevalent. However, in the
recent times there were interruptions in the line of the family and the monastery has
made great effforts to reestablish the hereditary succession.
605



In 1938, with the help of the local people, ICags mdud Nyi ma bstan
'dzin (1898-1953) moved the monastery to sNa steng and so it became known as
sNa steng Monastery. Later ICags mdud skal bzang rgyal mtshan (1922-1978)
took charge of the monastery. The monastery was destroyed during the Cultural
Revolution and the present head of the monastery is 1Сags mdud Zla ba rgyal
mtshan (b.1951). He took the initiative to rebuild it in the 1980s. g Yung drung nyi
ma (b.1973) acts as teacher in the new monastery.
4. Hierarchical system
-dgong bdag, hereditary
-bon slob
- one dbu mdzad
- two dge skos
- two gnyer ba
All the incumbents are replaced every three years with the exception of the
master of the monastery.
5. Current number of monks
There are fifty-nine novices and monks in the monastery
6. Education education
There are no regular classes; the novices are trained by the elder monks.
7. Educational exchange
The monks go to sNang zhig Monastery in rNga khog and to dGamal
Monastery (No.208) in Shar khog for further study; Zla ba rgyal mtshan received
teachings from bsKal bzang dar rgyas at dGa' mal Monastery and from Dri med 'od
zer, at A skyid skyang tshang Monastery (No.194) in mDzo dge.
8/9. Rituals
- 1st month: commemoration of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan from the
4th to the 5th day, ritual cycle of dBal gsas for five or seven days from the
21st day
- 4th month: the festival of sNa steng sgrub pa is based on the Ti tri su and lasts
seven days from the 23rd day ending with a 'cham dance for the public
- 6th month: the ritual cycle of the rNam rgyal for three days from the 27th day
- 8th month: the ritual cycle of sTag la for three days from the 26th day
- 9th month: the ritua cycle of Margyud for four days from the 9th day
- 10th month: the cycle of the Yi dam kun 'dus for three days from the 11th day
- 11th month: commemoration of sKyabs mgon Zla ba rgyal mtshan from the
606



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
7th to the 8th day
11. Income and expenses
The monastery has no regular source of income and depends on donations from
the faithful.
12. Local community
There are five villages: A gling with sixty families, Kitshal with twenty
families, Tshe yag with eighteen families, rGyal btsan with twenty families and Ta
khug ta pa with about forty families. In the local oral tradition the village Gyal
btsan and Ta khug ta pa are counted as one, Yag gi tsho ba bzhi, the "Four Excellent
Communities".
13. Local festivals
There is a la brsas on the mountain behind the monastery dedicated to the local
deity called de bsnyen g Yung drung rtsal. Its renewal ceremony is performed on
the 1st day of the 6th month by the monks of the monastery.
Mount A gling brag dkar, situated at the west of the monastery (accessible only
on foot), is considered as the residence of the local deity by the same name. The
renewal ceremony of its la btsas and the propitiation of the deity take place on the
4th day of the 4th month and are performed exclusively by the lay community
In Shar khog there are also two sacred mountains (gnas ri). One is called Byang
Bya dur and is located 1 km north of Ga' mal Monastery and the other Shar Dung
ri located 56 km east of the county town of Zung chu (cf. BBD). In the vicinity of
Mount Shar Dung ri, there is also a sacred lake called Dung ri gser mtsho. These
places are considered as holy places and venerated by both the monks and local
Sharwa lay people, as well as by devotees from other regions. The lake called
Huanglong in Chinese attracts numerous tourists every year.
14. Occupation of the local people
Farming and trade
Sources
(1) Interview in autumn in 1998 with: Tshe kho, a monk at the monastery (b.1932)
(2) Texts:
- ICags mdud bkra shis g-yung drung gling gi dkar chag me tog ishom 'phreng
by ICags mdud Zla ba rgyal mtshan, bsTan blo and sGra dpal, in Zing (Zung)
chu rdzong dgon pa so sogs (so 'i) dkar chag, pp. 123-145. 1993, Mimeograph
607



(200) Rin spungs Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is Rin spungs bKra shis smin grol gling.
2. Location
The monastery is located 22 km north of Songpan, the seat of Zung chu county
3. History
sKyang btsun g Yung drung bstan rgyal (b.1768), a descendant of sKyang
'phags in mDzo dge, went to sMan ri Monastery (No. 1) in gTsang and received
teachings from a great master called gYung drung dbang rgyal. After thirteen years
of study, the latter sent him back to Amdo. When he arrived in Shar khog, g Tso
tshang dbon po and his fifteen disciples came to meet him and became his disciples.
Later he was offered land by the local people and founded a hermitage at the site
called Rin spungs. Later he extended it into monastery. Towards the end of his life, a
thirteen-year old boy called Ge 'dun shes rab (b.1811) from dMu dge came to Rin
spungs following a vision he had received in dream. gYung drung bstan rgyal was
very enthusiastic about the new visitor and exhorted his disciples to accept dGe 'dun
shes rab as his reincarnation after his death. He asked dGe 'dun shes rab to return to
the monastery in seven years. He is said to have even made an inventory of all his
personal belongings in the presence of de 'dun shes rab, and ordered the monks to
give them to dGe 'dun shes rab upon his return. However, de 'dun shes rab did not
return seven years later as agreed so gYung drung bstan rgyas, before his death, left
a testament for him in a small wooden box which he hid in the wall of his meditation
cell. Finally, the monastery sent some monks to dMu dge to talk with dGe 'dun shes
rab's family who warmly welcomed them and accepted the recognition of their son
as the reincarnation of g Yung drung bstan rgyal, but the boy was not at home.
In the mean time, dGe 'dun shes rab had travelled to Gyal rong, Khyung po,
Kong po, IHa sa, rMe'u tshang, Dar sding, Zhu tshang; he studied at rMan ri for
seven years, practiced meditation at Byang gNam mtsho for one year and Khyung
po'i sgom grwa for another six years, and had visited many sacred places and
monasteries of different traditions (including Buddhism) where he studied and
practiced meditation with various great masters and acquired the new name of Shes
rab ye shes. Shortly after his return to dMu dge, remembering his promise to g Yung
drung bstan rgyal, he returned to the monastery. Although the master had died a few
years before he was given all gYung drung bstan rgyal's personal belongings and
valuables including the box with the testament
gYung drung bstan rgyal introduced the monastic tradition of sMan ri
Monastery and named the monastery Rin spungs bkra shis smin grol gling. He
608



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
became the second master of Kyang tshang lineage and abbot of Rin spungs
Monastery. The third master was bsTan 'dzin phun tshogs dbang rgyal. The fourth
was Shes rab rnam rgyal.
The reincarnation of Shes rab ye shes was born soon after his death in Chu mdo
village near the monastery, but he died very young. The following reincarnation,
Shes rab ram rgyal, was born in Shel bod village of dMu dge in 1895.
The fifth was gYung drung bstan 'dzin, born in 1955.
The monastery was destroyed during the Cultual Revolution and was rebuilt in
the 1980s.
4. Hierarchical system
- mkhan po who is a trulku
- grwa shang bla ma
- one dbu mdzad
- two dge skos
- one a mchod
- two mchod dpon
All the incumbents are replaced every two years, with the exception of the
grwa tshang bla ma who has no predetermined term of office.
5. Current number of monks
There are ninety-six monks and novices in the monastery.
6/7. Current education
Since skyang btsun g Yung drung bstan rgyal was a disciple of g Yung drung
dbang rgyal, a master of sMan ri Monastery, Rin spungs still sends its monks to
sMan ri and gYung drung gling monasteries in gTsang for teachings and ordination
8/9. Rituals
- Ist month: commemoration of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan from the
3rd to the 6th day, and the ritual cycle of dBal gsas from the 8th to the 15th
day
- 4th month: the festival of the dGe spyod for three days and the Mun sel sgrub
pa for seven days with 'cham dance on the last day for the public. The festival
is known as Rin spung dbyar gnas
- 7th month: the ritual based on the rNam rgyal stong mchod for three days
- 9th month: the observance of the smyung gnas fasting for nine days from the
13th day
609



11. Income and expenses
The monastery depends on offerings from its followers; the monks provide
their own food.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists seven villages in gTso tshang township: Rin
spungs with thirty-two families, Bar shod with eighteen families, Grang 'dzi with
fourteen families, ICang smad with twenty families, Bar rong with eighty families,
'Phel 'dzin with eleven families and Khri rgyal with twelve families; six villages
in A stong township: Tsha chu sgur with forty-six families, dBal smon with nine
families, Hor mthong with two families and the three villages of A stong: A stong
with forty-two families, Chu 'khyil sgur with thirty-eight families and gYang rten
with twenty-two families.
13. Local festival
The la btsas called bkra shis bde chen is on a hill in front of the monastery. Its
renewal ceremony, performed by the monks, takes place on the 10th day of the 7th
month, which is the last day of the rNam rgyal stong mchod ritual at the monastery.
The propitiation of the local deities of some of the following villages takes
place on the 1st of the 1st month: Rin spungs village's local deity is called Khyung
rgod and the la besas dedicated to him is located at the top of Mount Khyung rgod.
Bar shod village's local deity is called Brag rgan and the la btsas is located on
Mount Brag rgan. Bar rong village's local deity is called Kod po and the la btsas is
located on Mount Kod po.
The local deity of Phen 'dzin and Khri rgyal villages is called Bum pa and the
la btsas is located on Mount Bum pa. Tsha chu sgur village's local deity is called
Brag ri and the la btsas is located on Mount Brag ri. A stong village's local deity is
called Nyi 'ong and the la btsas is located on Mount Nyi 'ong.
Chu 'khyil sgur village's local deity is called gCal phrug gYung drung dgra
'dul and the la btsas is located on Mount gCal phrug. g Yang rten village's local deity
is called bra shis bde chen and the la btsas is located Mount bra shis bde chen.
dBal mon village's local deity is called Do tshang and the la btsas is located on
Mount Do tshang.
The monks and lay people also join other communities to venerate the two
sacred mountains Bya dur and Dung ri, situated in the area (cf. sNa steng Monastery
No.199).
14. Occupation of the local people
Agriculture and trade
610



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
Sources
(1) Interview in autumn 1998 with g Yung drung tshul khrims alias gYung drung
thar, a monk at the monastery (b.1963)
(2) Texts:
- Rin spungs bkra shis smin grol gling gi gdan rabs nyung bsdus brjod pa
tshangs pa'i dbyangs snyan by skal bzang dar rgyas, composed in 1984,
ZGSK pp. 107-121
This text by skal bzang dar rgyas is the only available work dealing with the
history of Rin spungs Monastery; the first part of the text states that sKyang btsun
g Yung drung bstan rgyal recognized dGe 'dun shes rab as his reincarnation when
he was still alive, and then later goes on to say that bs Tan 'dzin phun tshogs dbang
rgyal, the third skyang btsun, was recognized as the reincarnation of sKyang btsun
Rinpoche (when he is obviously the second reincarnation), so there seems to be a
some confusion between the two masters.
(201) sNang zhig dngul sku Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is sNang zhig gser khang rnam rgyal kun grags
gling.
2. Location
The monastery is located 21 km north of Songpan, the seat of Zung chu county.
3. History
There are two sNang zhig monasteries in Amdo: one in rNga khog and the
other in Shar khog, the latter belongs to the lineage of the former, since it was
founded by a descendant of Do 'phags chen po (b.1168). He is regarded as the first
master of the sNang zhig lineage.
Do 'phags chen po and skyang za g-yu sgron had three sons: Nyi ma 'dzin,
"Dul ba rgyal mtshan, and gYung drung rgyal mtshan (alias Shes rab 'od zer). The
eldest son was sent to Zhu sgom "phrul zhig for religious training and later became
known as Bya chen Nyi ma 'dzin. 'Dul ba rgyal mtshan, and g Yung drung rgyal
mtshan migrated to Shar khog. The family of Dul ba rgyal mtshan became known
as Cags mdud and the monastery he founded was called sNang zhig ICags mdud
and later became known as sNa steng bkra shis g-yung drung gling (No. 199).
However, it was gYung drung rgyal mtshan, the youngest brother, who took away
the famous silver image (dngul sku) of Dran pa nam mkha' of the family in Nga
khog with him when he came to Shar khog where he later founded a monastery
611



called Nang zhig dngul sku dgon. He had a son called bsTan pa rgyal mtshan who
succeeded him and looked after the monastery. However, at a later date, the sacred
silver image fell into the possession of the Cags mdud family.
Their lineages of the three brothers became known as the "three lineages of
sNang zhig" (sNang zhig khag gsum).
The following is a list of the masters in the lineage of the sNang zhig dngul
sku:
1. bsTan pa rgyal mtshande
2. bs Tan 'dzin ye shes rgyal mtshan
3. gYung drung tshe ring
4. Yon tan rgyal mtshant
5. Nyi ma bstan 'dzin
6. Tshe dbang rgyal
po
7. Zla ba rgyal mtshan
8. Klu 'bum yag
9. Bya 'phur
10. Rin chen Ihun grub
11. bs Tan pa tshul khrims
12. Nyi ma rgyal mtshan
13. 'Dul ba rgyal mtshan
14. Tshul khrims rgyal mtshan
15. Shes rab blo gros
16. Zla ba rgyal mtshan
17. Rin chen Ihun grub
18. Nam mkha' lhun grub
19. Rin chen rgyal mtshan
20. Kun dga phun tshogs
21. gYung drung bstan 'dzin
22. Blo gros thogs med
23. Nyi ma rgyal mtshan
24. Tshul khrims rgyal mtshan del
A
S
25. gTsug phud mam rgyal
After the last master's death, Nam mkha' blo gros of sNang zhig in Nga
khog became the master of the monastery, he was succeeded successively by Tshul
khrims bsTan pa'i rgyal mtshan, Shes rab bstan'dzin, and A tog rtogs ldan. The
monastery was knocked down during the Cultural Revolution. It was rebuilt in the
1980s. Shes rab 'od zer (b.1971), the present head of the monastery was recognized
as the reincarnation of Tshul khrims bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan, a famous hermit who,
however, did not belong to the sNang zhig lineage.
612



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
4. Hierarchical system
-dgon bdag, hereditary (gdung brgyud)
- two dbu mdzad
- two dge skos
- two gnyer pa
All of whom are replaced every three years except the head of the monastery
5. Current number of monks
There are ninety-one novices and monks in the monastery,
6. Current education
ducation
There are no organized classes; the novices are trained by the elder monks.
7. Educational exchange
In the past the monks took their odination from skal bzang dar rgyas of Ga'
mal Monastery (No.208), but now they go to sNang zhig Monastery (No.180) in
rNga khog.
8/9. Rituals
- 1st month: commemoration of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan from the
4th to the 5th day
- 2nd month: the smon lam ceremony from the 1st to the 7th day
- 3rd month: the ritual cycle of Ma rgyud from the 7th to the 9th day
- 5th month-6th month: the recitation ritual based on the Ti tri su from the 23th
day of the 5th month to the 1st day of the 6th month
- 10th month: the ritual cycles of Khro bo and Phur pa from the 16th to the 19th
day
- 11th month: commemoration of skyabs mgon Zla ba rgyal mtshan from the
7th to the 8th day
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has one printed copy of the Bonpo Kanjur and several other
manuscript copies of texts for ritual purposes.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery depends on offerings from its followers; the monks provide
their own food.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of twelve villages: Khri smin with ninety-five
613



families, A bstan with fifty families, Aho with fifteen families, Ha mes with
forty-five families, 'Brug skyid with fifteen families, sDong spel with sixty families,
sPang bzang with fifty families, Na gtsang with fifteen families, sPo 'bru with fifteen
families, rGyal phen with twenty-seven families, 'Khor rgye with twenty families
and Che g-yag with thirteen families.
13. Local festivals
In addition to Dung ri and Bya dur, the two most sacred Bonpo mountains in
the area, there is Mount Brag mkhar and its la btsas, located behind the monastery
and propitiated by the monks on the 1st day of the 6th month. Khri smin village's
la btsas called dKar ye is propitiated by the village people likewise on the 1st day
of the 6th month. The la btsas of A btsan village is renewed on the 1st of the 3rd
month. The villages Brag nag, Ya ho, Ha mes and 'Brug skyid have a common la
btsas. Its renewal ceremony takes place on the 4th day of the Sth month. sDong
spel has two la bisas, La chen and Gyal mkhar, the former is propitiated on the 1st
day of the 6th month, while the latter is propitiated on the 1st day of the 3rd month.
The la btsas of sPang bzang, called Gra 'dul, is propitiated (date was unclear). Na
gtsang, sPo 'brug, rGyal 'phen, Khor rgye and Che g-yag have the same la btsas
called Brag rgan.
The monks and local lay communities join other communities in the region
to venerate the two sacred mountains Bya dur and Dung ri situated in the Sharwa
region (cf. sNa steng Monastery No.190).
14. Occupation of the local people
Agriculture
Sources
(1) Interview in autumn 1998 with gYung dga' (b.1930) a monk at the monastery
(2) Texts:
- Nang zhig dgon pa'i dkar chag chu skyes dbang bo'i tshom phreng by Ha
smin(mes) gYong dga', in Zing (Zung) chu rdzong dgon pa so sogs (so't) dkar
chag, mimeograph, 1993, pp. 92-106
(202) Kyang tshang Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is sKyang tshang Phun tshogs dar rgyas gling.
614



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal. Gansu and Sichuan
2. Location
The monastery is located 23 km north of Songpan, the seat of Zung chu county.
3. History
bSod nams bzang po (alias Gyal ba rgya mtsho), a master of the sGur skyang
lineage in mDzo dge was invited by a village chief called mGon po skyabs to Shar
khog. This is said to have taken place in the Earth-Dragon Year of the 4th Rab byung
(1268). He eventually founded Kyang tshang Monastery. His successors in the
family were Rin chen blo gros, bDud 'dul dbang grags, g Yung drung bstan rgyal,
Kon mchog yon tan, rNam rgyal thogs med. After the latter's death the line of the
sKyang tshang family was interrupted.
dBra tsha A lha ye shes was selected to be the head of the monastery, but during
his time, in the Fire-Dog Year of the 10th Rab byung (1586), the monastery was
destroyed by an earthquake. Several decades later, rTogs Idan gYung drung bstan
'dzin (b.1654), a brother of Tshe rgyal, the skyang tshang chief, returned from
sMan ri Monastery (No. 1) and asked Tshe rgyal to give him a site called Kyang klu
gdong where he founded a small monastery. Later A mkhar, another sKyang tshang
chief, asked Bya tshang rTogs Idan bsTan 'dzin rgyal mtshan to be the head of the
monastery, and both chief and the master agreed to move the monastery to a new
site. The new monastery was called gSer khang rin chen, but it was burned down in
a fight
rTogs Idan Phun tshogs 'od zer founded a new monastery called Khri skyong
la kha'i dgon Kun khyab bde chen gling for skyang tshang village. Then syang
sprul Nam mkha'rgyal mtshan was invited to be the head of the monastery in the
Earth-Rat Year of the 14th Rab byung (1828). The next head in the succession was
Rin chen Tshul khrims. Since there was no source of water in the vicinity of the
monastery, IHun grub rgyal mtshan moved it to rNyi 'bur valley where it became
known as rNyi 'bur Monastery. A sngags Gyal mtshan, also known as Togs ldan
bsTan pa tshul khrims (1907-1932), was appointed as the head of the monastery
after having served as the dbu mdzad in Nyi 'bur Monastery. He moved the
monastery to the present site in 1916. He was succeeded by sKyang dbon bsTan pa'i
rgyal mtshan (1911-1955).
In 1950, the monastery appointed Hor btsun bsTan 'dzin blo gros rgya mtsho
(1889-1975) as the chief teacher (bon slob) and under his guidance, metaphysic
studies (mrshan nyid) were introduced. However, the monastey was razed to the
ground during the Cultural Revolution and was rebuilt again in the 1980s.
4. Hierarchical system
- dgon bdag, mainly by appointment
- grwa tshang bla ma (three years)
615



- two dbu mdzad (dbu mdzad chung ba for two years, then as dbu mdzad che ba
again two years)
- two dge skos (two years)
- two spyi ba (two years)
- bla ma'i gnyer ba (three years)
B ody
The present head of the administrative committee is Khro bo.
5. Current number of monks
There are eighty-two novices and monks in the monastery.
6. Current education
There are no organized classes, the novices are trained by the elder monks.
7. Educational exchange
The monastery is a branch of A skyid Kyang tshang.
8/9. Rituals
- Ist month: commemoration of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan from the
4th to the 5th day
- 2nd month: the monks are divided into two groups to perform the ritual cycles
of dBal gsas and Phur pa from the 1st to the 7th day, followed by the festival
of sKyang tshang Ma tri organized by all the monks together from the 8th to
15th day of with a 'cham dance on the last day for the public audience
- 4th month: the ritual cycle of Ma rgyud on the 27th and 28th days, followed
by the smyung gnas fasting on the 29th and 30th days
- 8th month: commemoration of Hor btsun bs Tan 'dzin blo gros rgya mtsho on
the 6th day
- 11th month: commemoration of skyabs mgon Zla ba rgyal mtshan on the 7th
and 8th days
- 12th month: commemoration of bs Tan pa tshul khrims on the 7th and 8th
days, and the dgu gtor rite on the 28th and 29th days
Ob dure
11. Income and expenses
The monastery has no regular source of income and depends on offerings from
its followers.
12. Local lay community
The local lay community consists of two communities with 6 villages, the Sha
mo community: Ro wer village with twenty-seven families, Shog tog with fourteen
families, La ga with sixteen families and mKhar sgang with twenty-three families.
616



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
The skyang tshang community has two villages: skyang tshang with one hundred
and eight families and Chu 'khyil with sixty five families.
13. Local festivals
There is a la bstas on top of the hill behind the monastery called Seng ge thod
pa. It is propitiated by the monks alone on the 6th day of the 1st month.
Bon ri is the common la btsas dedicated to the local deity called g Yul las mam
rgyal who is believed to be residing on Mount bDud gzhom. The deity is propitiated
by the lay communities both Sha mo and sKyang tshang on the 1st day of the Ist
month. The la btsas called Gradul is propitiated on the 1st day of the 1st month.
Shog tog village has two la btsas: Yar ta and Mar ta and mKhar sgang village's
sKya log la btsas are propitiated on the 16th day of the 11th month. The la btsas of
sKyang tshang village is propitiated on the 16th day of the 12th month and that of
Chu 'khyil village on the 4th day of the 5th month.
The monks and local lay community join other communities to venerate the
sacred Mount Bya dur (BBD), Mount Dung ri and the lake gSer mtsho located in the
Sharwa region (cf. sNa steng Monastery No.190). Nowadays the lake called Huang
long in Chinese attracts many Chinese tourists.
14. Occupation of the local people
Farming and trade
Sources
(1) Interview in autumn 1998 with skal bzang rgyal bzang alias Klu thar rgyal, a
monk at the monastery (b.1940)
(2) Texts:
- dPal gshen bstan phun tshogs dar rgyas gling gi dkar chag mu tig tshom
phreng by skyang bla Blo bzang rgya mtsho, Lung rig snyan grags and Khro
bo rgyal mtshan in Zing (Zung) chu rdzong dgon pa so sogs (so 'i) dkar chag,
mimeograph, 1993, pp. 68-91
(203) mKhar yag Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is gShen bstan g-yung drung nor bu dar rgyas gling,
Since it is located in mKhar yag village, it is also called mKhar yag dgon.
2. Location
The monastery is located 109 km from Songpan, the seat of Zung chu county
617



3. History
The monastery, which was first simply a temple, was founded by Gyal ba
rin chen, who was originally from 'Bar khams Monastery. He also established a
small hermitage called Ra skor zhing gi ri khrod. Later bsTan 'dzin kun khyabs
transformed the hermitage into a monastery in 1887. As he was from dGa' mal
Monastery (No.208), the new monastery became a branch of dGa' mal. The next
master was sNang zhig sPrul sku (d. 1937) who was regarded as a reincarnation
of Nyi ma rig 'dzin of sNang zhig dNgul sku Monastery (No.201). He moved the
monastery to a place called gNyan yul in 1920. After that Cags mdud Nyi ma bstan
'dzin looked after the monastery for a few years. Then sNang zhig Rin chen rnam
rgyal (b.1895) became the master of the monastery. The latter was succeeded by his
nephew bSod nams rgyal mtshan (1939-1959). Tshul khrims bstan'dzin (1918-1985)
became the master of the monastery in 1982. The monastery was demolished during
the Cultural Revolution and was rebuilt again in the 1980s. The present master of the
monastery is gYung drung tshul khrims (b.1932).
4. Hierarchical system
d
-dgon bdag
- one dbu mdzad
- two dge skos
- mchod g-yog
Both dbu mdzad and dge bskos are replaced every three years. The dge bskos
also act as gnyer ba and the mchod g-yog has no predetermined term of office.
5. Current number of monks
There are thirty novices and monks in the monastery.
6. Current education
There are no organized classes; the novices are trained by the elder monks.
7. Educational exchange
Until sNang zhig dNgul sku Monastery sent rGyal ba bstan 'dzin to the
monastery to teach the monks went to dGa' mal monastery for religious training.
8/9. Rituals
The ritual cycle of the 7 tri su from the 11th to the 19th day of the 1st month
with 'cham dance on the 18th day, the observance of the summer fast (dbyar gnas)
from the 13th to the 16th day of the 6th month; the ritual cycle of sTag la with dgu
gtor rite from the 22nd to the 30th day of the 12th month.
618



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
11. Income and expenses
The monastery depends on donations from the faithful; the monks provide their
own food.
12. Local community
The local lay community consisted of all the gNyan yul tsho bdun, the
"seven villages of gNyan yul", but mKhar lung village is now half Bonpo and half
Buddhist, mKhar yag village with twenty-eight families, Ngo de with twenty-five
families, rDa nga with seventeen families, dGon nang with fifteen families, gSer
rko with twenty-six families, gDong yas with seven families and three families in
mKhar lung.
13. Local festivals
The monastery has three la brsas: one at the top of the mountain behind the
monastery called mKha' spyod g-yung drung dgra 'dul. The second dar sgong is
located 8 km north of the monastery and the third g Yag myo rdo 'bum is located 25
km east of the monastery. Their renewal ceremony takes place on the 15th day of the
5th month and is attended only by the monks.
mKhar yag village has its own la brsas called dBus lung nor bu phyug mo and
is propitiated on the 1st day of the 1st month.
Ngo ke village's la btsas is called Nor bu dbang rgyal and is located 3 km
southwest of the monastery.
The la btsas of rDa nga village is called Rag stag nor bu and is located 6 km
southwest of the monastery. The la btsas of dGon nang village called bZo gnyan
mgar ba yon tan is located 8 km east of the monastery. The las btsas of gSer rko
village is called s Tobs po che and located 10 km east of the monastery. The la btsas
of gDong yas village is located 10 km southeast of the monastery.
The communities, both monastic and lay, join people from other villages to
venerate the sacred Mount Bya dur and Mount Dung ri situated in the region (cf. Na
steng Monastery No.190).
14. Occupation of the local people
Farming
Sources
(1) Interviews in autumn 1998 with: Gyal ba (b.1934), a monk of sNang zhig dNgul
sku Monastery who was sent to teach at mKhar yag. The following monks are
from mKhar yag Monastery: Shes rab bstan 'phel (b.1976); bs Tan pa rab rgyas
(b.1970); bSod nams rgya mtsho (b.1963) and skal bzang (b.1973)
(2) Texts:
619



- gNyan yul dgon pa gshen bstan g-yung drung nor bu dar rgyas gling gi dkar
chag by sGra dpal in Zing (zung) chu rdzong dgon pa so sogs (so 'i) dkar
chag, Mimeograph 1993, pp.231-240
Notes
1
The gNyan yul dgon pa gshen bstan g-yung drung nor bu dar rgyas gling gi dkar chag
records him as sNang zhig sPrul sku without giving his real name, but as such it is not
found in other documents.
(204) Gla ro Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is dMu dge Gla ro gYung drung dgon.
2. Location
The monastery is located 180 km of Songpan, the seat of Zung chu county.
3. History
According to the dMu dge gla ro g-yung drung dgon gyi dkar chag (hereafter
Gla ro dgon gyi dkar chag, ZGSK pp. 247-255) the entire population of dMu dge
was Bonpo, and there were four large Bonpo monasteries and a number of smaller
ones in the region. The four monasteries were A sngags khyung tshang, A skyid nor
bu gling, mDo bstan 'ol mo gling and Gla ro g-yung drung gling. In the 10th Rab
byung (1567-1626), Yon tan rgya mtsho, a lama from the dGe lugs pa monastery
of sTong skor in Hor s Tong skor (Gla ro dgon gyi dkar chag ZGSK pp.247-249) in
Kokonor invaded dMu dge in Shar khog with his army and according to the same
source A sngags khyung tshang Monastery was burned down with the monks inside
(ZGSK pp.254-255) and all the other monasteries were also destroyed with the
exception of Gla ro Monastery.
Fortunately later sNang zhig Nyi ma rig 'dzin was able to save the monastery
and rebuilt it in the Wood-sheep Year of the 14th Rab byung (1825).
The successive heads of the monastery were:
1. bsTan pa rgyal mtshan
2. bs Tan 'dzin dbang rgyal
3. bkra shis phun tshogs
4. gYung drung rgyal mtshan
5. skal bzang rgyal mtshan
6. Kun bzang rgyal mtshan
7. gTsugs phud mam rgyal



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
8. bra shis zla ba rgyal mtshan
9. Dung ri dBang Idan
10. Bla ma mKhar yag tshang
11. Tshul khrims bstan'dzin
12. gYung drung bstan'dzin rgyal mtshan
The monastery was knocked down during the Cultural Revolution and gYung
drung bstan'dzin rgyal mtshan rebuilt it in 1987. According to oral tradition, the
original population of du dge came from Zhang zhung during King Khri srong
Ide btsan's persecution of Bon in the 8th century. The group, led by two personages
known as s Tag la rje and dBal gsas skyabs, sought refuge in the area where they
settled (ZGSK pp.254-255). Many families have preserved a number of ritual objects
and customs from Zhang zhung.
4. Hierachical system
- mkhan po
- one dbu mdzad
- one dge skos
- one gnyer ba
- one mchod dpon, wih no predetermined terms of office
5. Current number of monks
There are thirteen monks and novices in the monastery.
6. Current education
There are no organized classes, the novices are trained by the elder monks.
7. Educational exchange
There are occasional educational exchanges with mKhar yag Monastery.
8/9. Rituals
The observance of the summer fast (dbyar gnas) for three days in the 6th or 7th
month with no fixed dates, the dgu gtor rite based on the ritual cycle of sTag la from
the 25th to the 30th day of the 12th month.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery depends on offerings from the faithful; the monks provide their
own food.
12. Local community
The local lay community (Iha sde) consists of villages: Te'u jo with seven
621



families, bKa' srung with six families, Chu lung with six families, Ba zhun with six
families and Do 'phags with four families.
13. Local festivals
The monks and local lay community join other communities in the region to
venerate Mounts Bya dur and Dung ri, the two most important sacred mountains of
Bon in the region (cf. sNa steng Monastery No.199).
14. Occupation of the local people
Farming and nomads
Sources
(1) Interviews with following monks of the monastery in autumn 1998: Shes rab
bstan'dzin (b.1978), Shes rab 'od zer (b.1977), skal bzang dar rgyas (b.1973)
and Phun tshogs (b.1980)
(2) Texts:
-dMu dge gla ro g-yung drung dgon gyi dkar chag by bs Tan 'dzin mchog
legs rab rgyas in Zing (zung) chu rdzong dgon pa so sogs (so 'i) dkar chag,
Mimeograph 1993, pp. 247-256
(205) gSer gling Monastery
1. Name
The monastery is also known as gShen bstan nyi ma 'bum gling,
2. Location
The monastery is located in Zhang ngu khog, 77 km from Songpan, the seat of
Zung chu county.
3. History
The monastery was founded by mKhar yag g Yung drung kun khyabs in the
Fire-Pig Year of 15th Rab byung (1887) in order to settle a conflict between two
lay communities: Tod tsho dgu and Mad tsho dgu, mKhar yag g Yung drung kun
khyabs was succeeded by a series of masters as the head of the monastery:
1. mKhar yag gYung drung kun khyabs
2. bsTan 'dzin ngag dbang mam rgyal
3. mKhar yag Shes rab
4. Ra thang Togs Idan dkar po
5. Dung ri Nam mkha' dbang drag



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
6. Dung ri bsTan 'dzin dbang Idan (b.1887)
7. Dung ri Nam mkha' bstan'dzin (b.1918)
The monastery was rebuilt in the 1980s. bs Tan 'dzin nor bu and bSod nams
tshul khrims were the monks who worked on the reconstruction. The present head of
the monastery is Shes rab kun gsal.
4. Hierachical system
-dgon bdag, hereditary
- two dbu mdzad
- two dge skos
- one gnyer pa
- two mchod dpon
All the incumbents, besides dgon bdag, are replaced every three years,
5. Current number of monks
There are forty-eight novices and monks in the monastery.
6. Current education
There are no organized classes; the novices are trained by the elder monks.
7. Educational exchange
The monks go to da' mal Monastery (No.208) to take their ordination
8/9. Rituals
The recitation ritual based on the Ti tri su from the 7th to the 11th day of the
Ist month with 'cham dances on the 15th day, the ceremony of the mChod pa stong
mtshan from the 8th to the 13th day of the 2nd month; the ritual based on the rNam
rgyal stong mchod from the 11th to the 15th day of the 4th month; the The dgu gtor
rite based on the ritual cycle of sTag la from the 21st to the 29th day of the 12th
month.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery has no regular source of income and depends on donations from
its followers.
12. Local community
The local lay community (tha sde) consists of eighteen villages grouped into
two communities, sTod tsho dgu and Mad tsho dgu. The Upper Nine Villages
(s Tod tsho dgu): 1. 'Bar ra steng with fifty-five families, 2. La yas with fifty-three
families, 3. Khu khag with thirty-four families, 4. 'Bu se with thirty-two families, 5.
623



Bo ras with twenty-five families, 6. Re wo with thirty-eight families, 7. Ngo we with
twenty-five families, 8. Tsi sri with forty-five families, 9. Sra nge with twenty-three
families.
The Lower Nine Villages (sMad tsho dgu): 1. Di gu with twenty-four families,
2. Dzi be with thirty-four families, 3. Ho tse with thirty families, 4. Sra ti with
forty-five families, 5. rTse tshang with twenty-five families, 6. Zhi ke po with forty
families, 7. 'Dzu pa with ten families, 8. Tsha kho with ten families, 9. Ra 'gu with
ten families
13. Local festivals
The monastery has its own la btsas called Bhe te, located at the top of Kho ri te,
the mountain behind the monastery and propitiated on the 15th day of the 1st month
by the monks.
The la btsas of sTod tsho dgu is known as Mo ba rin chen. The la btsas of Mad
tsho dgu is called Ku ne 'bru tse.
The local lay community, together with other Sharwa communities, also
venerates Mounts Bya dur and Dung ri, the two most important sacred mountains in
the region (cf. sNa steng Monastery No.199).
14. Occupation of the local people
Farming
Sources
(1) Interviews with the follwing monks in the monastery in autumn 1998: Shes rab
kun gsal (b.1954) and Shes rab gtsug rgyan (b.1978)
(2) Texts:
- Zhang ngu dpal gshen bstan nyi ma 'bum gling gi dkar chags (chag) gsal ba'i
me long by Lung rig snyan grags (ZGSK pp.271-275)
- gShen chen klubdud brag dkar gvi bsang yig ha ri'i ljon bzang by sNang zhig
gYung drung bstan pa'i nyi ma, MS
- gNyan gyi rgyal bo ge ne 'brug rise'i dgos 'dod kun 'byung by Dar rgyas
rgyal mtshan, MS
-rNga khul zung chu rdzong gi gser len dgon pa'i lo rgyus mdor bsdus, NKMGL
pp.108-109
(206) Sa 'brug Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is Sa 'brug gShen bstan kun gsal smin grol gling,
624



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
2. Location
The monastery is 63 km from Songpan, the seat of Zung chu county.
3. History
The monastery was founded in 1855 by Rin spungs Shes rab seng ge, a master
from Rin spungs monastery. He successfully settled a conflict between the local
villages which earned him great reputation in the area and as a result he had the
monastery built in memory of his mediation.
His successors until the mid-20th century were: g Yung drung phun tshogs, Cho
'dzi dbon po, Wer to bs Tan 'dzin dbang grays, Wer to Gyal ba bkra shis and Bon
nang gYung drung dbang Idan. The monastery suffered damages during the Cultural
Revolution and Bon nang gYung drung dbang Idan undertook the monastery's
reconstruction in 1986. The present master of the monastery is gYung drung blo gros
nyi ma (b.1969).
4. Hierarchical system
-dgon bdag, elected
One monk serves as both dbu mdzad and dge skos with no predetermined term
of office.
5. Current number of monks
There are ten novices and monks.
6. Current education
There are no organized classes, the younger monks are trained by the elder
monks.
7. Educational exchange
The monastery has no special ties with any other monastery
8/9. Rituals
Commemoration of of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan on the 15th day of
the 1st month; the observance of the smyung gnas fast from the 13th to the 15th day
of the 6th month; the smon lam ceremony from the 7th to the 15th day of the 11th
month.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery has no regular source of income and depends on offerings from
the faithful.
625



12. Local community
The local lay population consists of three communities: Nye tsi, Bod sde and
Bhan. The Nye tsi community has five villages: Kye khri with twenty families, La
chen with fifteen families, Pe khri with sixteen families, Pe wa with twenty families
and 'Ju ba with two families; The Bod sde community has three villages: Klu bu
gsum with twenty-three families, Khran kha with twenty families and don pa nang
with fifteen families;
The Bhan community has three villages; Wer to with fifteen families, Bhan
gong ma with twenty families and Bhan 'og ma with thirty families.
In addition to the three communities, there are eighteen families in Si re village,
thirty-three families in Li dbyin, and twenty-three families in Li dgu.
13. Local festivals
The la btsas called bkra shis, which is situated at the top of Mount Gyu bu
gdong, behind the monastery, is propitiated by both monks and lay people on the 3rd
day of the 1st month.
The la brsas of the Nye tsi community known as 'Brug rtse. Its renewal
ceremony takes place on the 15th day of the 6th month and attended only by the lay
members of the community. The la btsas called Wod pa of the Bod sde community
is propitiated on the 15th day of the Sth month by the lay members of its community
The date of the renewal ceremony of la btsas called Bhe bho rtse dgu of the Bhan
community is unknown.
14. Occupation of the local people
Agriculture
Sources
(1) Interview in autumn 1998 with g Yung drung blo gros nyi ma, the present master
of the monastery (b.1969)
(2) Texts:
- Sa 'brug dgon pa dpal gshen bstan kun gsal smin grol gling gi tho yig dkar
chags (chag) by sGra tog gYung drung 'gyur med in Zing (zung) chu rdzong
dgon pa so sogs (so 'i) dkar chag, Mimeograph, 1993, pp. 241-246
(207) Brag g-yung drung Hermitage
1. Name
The full name of the hermitage, which is actually a nunnery, is Brag dkar
g-yung drung 'khyud rtse gsang chen smin grol gling.
626



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
2. Location
The hermitage is located 2 km on foot from dga' mal Monastery (No.208),
at the top of the mountain behind the monastery. 34 km from Songpan, the seat of
Zung chu county.
3. History
Brag s-yung drung is a hermitage of dGa' mal Monastery. Its history is
practically unknown. There are hermits who live in separate quarters.
In the 1980s Tshul khrims rnam dag, the forest guardian, who has lived as
a tantric practitioner at the site for many years, obtained permission to build a
nunnery. This is the only Bonpo nunnery in the area,
4. Hierarchical system
None
5. Number of hermits
There are twenty-six nuns in the nunnery and fifteen monk hermits.
6. Current Education
The nuns are trained by the master of the nunnery either collectively or
individually.
7. Educational exchange
The nunnery maintains close ties with dGa' mal Monastery, which sends
teachers there.
8/9. Rituals
The main ritual practice of the nunnery is based on the cycle of Ma rgyud, but
there is also performance of rituals as follows:
- 2nd month: practice of meditation in conjunction with a ceremony based on
the rDzogs chen sku gsum rang shar by Shar rdza bkra shis rgyal mtshan
- 4th month: the ritual practice based on the 7she dbang bod yul ma by y Yung
drung gling pa, from the 4th to the 15th day
- 6th month: the ritual practice based on the mKha' 'gro gsang gcod by sPrul
sku Khro gnyan rgyal mtsahn on the 14th and 15th days
- 8th month: the ritual cycle of Ma rgyud on the 24th and 25th days finishing
with a 'cham dance
11. Income and expenses
The nunnery has no regular source of income and depends on offerings from
627



the faithful; the nuns and hermits provide their own food.
Sources
(1) Interview in autumn 1998 with Tshul khrims mam dag (b.1945)
(2) Texts:
- Brag dkar g-yung drung 'khyud rtse gsang chen smin grol gling gi lo rgyus
nyung bsdus dwangs 'dren me long by Tshul khrims yar 'phel, MS
- gSang mchog gnas chen bya dur gyi bsang mchod lha Inga 'i sgra dbyangs by
sGra btsun Ye blo, MS
- Brag dkar g-yung drung nor bu spungs pa'i gnas bdag bskul ba, anonymous.
MS
(208) dGa' mal Monastery
1. Name
The full name is dGa' mal gYung drung dar rgyas gling.
2. Location
The monastery is located on the roadside 34 km north of the county seat of
Zung chu.
3. History
The monastery was founded by Rin chen rgyal mtshan of the 'Tshab tsha family
in 1378. The family is considered as sacred (gdung brgyud). The monastery was
therefore looked after by a series of masters from the family as the heads of the
establishment. The following is a list of the heads of monastery starting form its
founder:
1. Tshab tsha Rin chen rgyal mtshan
2. Tshab tsha Blo gros rgyal mtshan (1387-1408), a nephew of the first
3. Tshab tsha Tshul khrims rgyal mtshan (1411-1446)
4. Tshab tsha Shes dbang g-yung drung (1432-1492)
5. Tshab tsha gTsug phud rgyal mtshan (1477-1526)
6. Tshab tsha g Yung drung bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan (1517-1568)
7. Tshab tsha bs Tan 'dzin tshul khrims (1562-1626)
8. Tshab tsha Shes rab bsTan 'dzin (1629-1649)
9. Tshab tsha gYung drung rgyal mtshan (1653-1699)
10. Tshab tsha bsTan 'dzin nyi ma (1683-1734)
11. Tshab tsha bSod nams nyi ma (1726-1775)
12. Tshab tsha g Yung drung bstan'dzin (1779-1798)
628



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
13. Tshab tsha bsTan 'dzin rgyal mtshan (1792-1862)
14. Tshab tsha gYung drung bstan rgyal (1899-1960)
15. Ha rig pa Blo gros rnam rgyal (b.1947)
16. Tshab tsha bsTan pa gong 'phel (b.1947)
17. dPal grags
18. mKhar yag Nor bu dbang rgyal (b.1933)
19. gYung drung kun khyab (d. 1971)
20. Khyung po rab rgyas (b.1940)
21. bs Tan 'dzin tshul khrims
22. Bar ma Ye shes rgyal mtshan (b.1958)
23. Tshab tsha mkhyen rab brtse chen (b.1945), the present head of the
monastery
4. As hierarchical system
-dgon bdag, head of the monastery, hereditary
- two dbu mdzad
- two dge skos
- two gnyer pa
- two mchod dpon
All the incumbents are replaced every three years with the exception of the
mchod dpon who is replaced every year.
5. Current number of monks
There are one hundred and eight monks and novices in the monastery.
6. Current education
There are no organized classes, the novices are trained by the elder monks.
7. Educational exchange
The monastery has close ties with sNang zhig Monastery (No.180) in rNga
khog that sends a teacher whenever needed.
8/9. Rituals
- 1st month: commemoration of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan on the 4th
and 5th days, and the dGa' mal smon lam festival from the 7th to the 18th day
In the past, the sa glang prediction ceremony was held in the early morning of
the last day of the dGa' mal smon lam festival and during the day the 'cham dance
was performed for the public audience.
- 1st month-2nd month: the dgu gtor rite based on the Khro phur from the 26th
day of the to the 1st day of the 2nd month
629



- 3rd month: the ritual cycle of Ma rgyud from the 13th to the 15th day
- 4th month: the observance of the summer-fast (dbyar gnas) from the 8th to the
15th day
- 11th month: commemoration of of sKyabs mgon Zla ba rgyal mtshan on the
7th and 8th days
- 12th month: the ritual cycle of sTag la from the 10th to the 15th day
10. Books held in the monastery
There are manuscript copies of several works by the first and thirteenth Tshab
tsha masters.
11. Income expenses
The monastery has no regular source of income and depends on offerings from
the faithful.
12. Local community
There are five local communities which form the local lay community (tha
sde) of the monastery. They are A 'ben, Ha phan, mTsho phan, mTha' ba and rMa
yul. The A 'ben community comprises four villages: Gya khag with nine families,
A pa with fourteen families, sMan tshang with nineteen families and Tsho ngan
with ten families. The Ha phan community comprises two villages: Kha stod with
twenty-seven families and Chu 'khyil brag dgon with thirty-three families. The
mTsho phan community comprises three villages: Gya khag with seven families,
Grwa khag with ten families and Chu "khyil brag dgon with ten families. The m Tha'
ba community comprises four villages: 'Bro sde with thirteen families, rTa nga with
three families, rGya khag with eight families and mKhas grub with five families.
The rMa yul community has three villages: Gra to with six families, Brag 'gag with
eight families and bDud bcom with five families.
On the mountain behind the monastery called Shes rab lha rtse there are two la
btsas. One is called mTshan nyid la btsas which is built at the top, the other la btsas,
on the mountainside known as Srid rgyal la btsas, is dedicated to the goddess Srid
rgyal. The renewal ceremony of these la btsas, performed by the monks, takes place
on the 1st day of the Sth month.
Mount Ri Dzam bha lha, believed to be the abode of the local deity with the
same name, is located 15 km east of the monastery. The deity is propitiated by the
five communities together on the 5th day of the 5th month.
There is also the sacred mountain (gnas ri) known as Bya dur located 1 km
north of monastery (cf. sNa steng Monastery No.199). It is venerated by all the
people from Shar khog and other regions.
630



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
14. Occupation of the local people
Agriculture and trading
Sources
(1) Interviews in autumn of 1998 with the following monks at the monastery: Sra
bstan mi 'gyur (b.1936), Tshul khrims rgya mtsho (b.1964) and Shes rab mthar
phyin (b.1972)
(2) Texts:
-rNga khul zung chu rdzong gi bya dur dga'smin (mal) dgon pa 'i lo rgyus
mdor bsdus, NKGL pp.94-97
- dPal gshen bstan dga' mal g-yung drung dar rgyas gling gi dkar chag dpyid
kyi glu dbyangs thos pa tshig gi rub phreng, ZGSK pp.146-171
- Toni Huber, 'Contribution on the Bon Religion in A-mdo': The Monastic
Tradition of Bya-dur dGa -mal in Shar-khog'. Acta Orientalia, Vol.59 (1998),
179-227
(209) New Ga' mal Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is dga' mal gShen bstan kun khyab bde chen gling.
2. Location
The monastery is located on the roadside 34 km north of the county seat of
Zung chu.
3. History
After the events of Cultural Revolution, there were several unsuccessful
attempts to found a new monastery for all the Bonpo population in Shar khog.
Finally, in the nineteen-eighties the local authorities gave permission to rebuild one
Bonpo monastery on the site of the old dGa' mal Monastery. It regrouped the five
former main monasteries: Ga'mal, sNa steng (No.199), Rin sprungs (No.200).
sNang zhig dngul sku (No.201), and sKyang tshang (No 202).
When the assembly hall of the new dGa' mal was completed, Shes rab mthar
phyin (b.1933) was chosen to be the abbot and skal bzang dar rgyas the chief
teacher (bon slob) of the new monastery. The monks of the old Gal' mal were
content to cooperate in establishing the new dGa' mal. Later, however, the monks
of skyang tshang, sNang zhig, Rin sprungs, Na steng and other monasteries in
the area began to rebuild their own monasteries at their original sites and resumed
independent religious activities. This event led the monks of the old dGamal to
631



rebuild their own monastery too, although the two are now located within the same
compound. The new dGa' mal nevertheless continues to function as a representative
body of the five monasteries.
4. Hierarchical system
- one mkhan po, appointed
- two dge skos who are replaced every two years.
Every year since 1996, the five monasteries in turn send an abbot, a dbu mdzad,
a mchod dpon and a 'cham dpon; there is one bon slob and one lo gsum mkhan
po, chosen among the monks in the monastery or invited from one of the other
monasteries.
5. Current number of monks
There are few monks living in the monastery on a permanent basis and their
number fluctuates. However, when the five monasteries mentioned above gather at
the monastery to perform the two major annual rituals, their number exceeds four
hundred.
6. Current education
There are no organized classes; the novices are trained by the elder monks.
7. Educational exchange
The monastery maintains close ties with the five monasteries mentioned above.
8/9. Rituals
- Ist month: commemoration of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan on the 4th
and 5th days; the smon lam festival from the 18th to the 23rd day of the 1st
month with the 'cham dance on the last day all five monasteries together. This
gathering is known as dgun Ishogs, the ritual in winter
- 4th month: the observance of the summer-fast (dbyar gnas) from the 13th to
the 15th day
- 5th month of the the recitation ceremony of the Ti tri su (dbyar tshogs) from
the 8th to the 16th day of the with the 'cham dance on the last day all five
monasteries together. This congregation is called dbyar Ishogs.
- 9th month: the ritual cycle of Phur pa from the 23rd to the 30th day
- 10th month: commemoration of Zla ba rgyal mtshan on the 8th and 9th days
11. Income and expenses
The monastery has no regular source of income and depends on offerings from
its followers.
632



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
12. Local community
Since the monastery represents the five monasteries mentioned above, it has no
local lay community of its own.
13. Local festivals
For the local festivals, see the accounts of the five monasteries.
14. Occupation of the local people
See No.12.
Sources
(1) Interview in autumn 1998 with: Nam ram Tshe ring dbang rgyal, a monk at the
monastery (b.1937)
(2) Texts:
- Zing (zung) chu bya dur dga' mal dgon chen nam dpal gshen bstan kun khyab
bde chen gling gi dkar chag lung rig chu shel dbang po i bdud rtsi 'i rgvun by
Gra dpal, ZGSK pp.35-67
-rNga khul zung chu rdzong gi dung ri bya 'phur dgon pa' lo rgvus mdor
bsdud, NKGL pp. 101-102
. 'Victory banners, social prestige and religious identity: Ritualized sponsorship
and the revival of Bon monasticism in Amdo Shar-khog' by Mona Schrempf
in Samten G. Karmay and Yasuhiko Nagano, ed., New Horizons in Bon
Studies, National Museum of Ethnology, Osaka 2000, pp.328-329
(210) Shar khog gTso tshang Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is gTso tshang sMin grol bstan rgyas gling and was
named after its founder, g Tso 'phags Zla ba rgyal mtshan.
2. Location
The monastery is located 17 km north of Songpan, the seat of Zung chu county
3. History
According to Hor btsun bs Tan "dzin blo gros, g Tso 'phags Zla ba rgyal mtshan,
was born in the Earth-Rat Year of the 2nd rab byung (1168). His successor was
gTso 'phags Nyi ma rgyal mtshan. After several generations the gTso tshang lineage
was interrupted, but was reestablished with gYung drung bstan 'dzin who rebuilt
the assembly hall (du khang) in 1862. The monastery was then looked after by a
633



series of religious practitioners: bSod nams bstan rgyal, Shes rab bstan'dzin, A khu
"Brug yag, g Yung drung phun tshogs and Kun dga' rgyal mtshan. The monastery
was closed down during the Cultural Revolution and was reopened in 1995, later
than most monasteries which, for the most part, were rebuilt in the 1980s. Prior to its
reopening, its monks lived in Rin spungs Monastery (No.200), since, according to
oral tradition, Rin spungs was originally a branch of gTsotshang.
The reconstruction of gTso tshang was part of the Development Project of the
One Hundred Townships of Sichuan Province launched in 1991 which included
gTso tshang township. The monks of g Tso tshang Monastery living in Rin spungs
moved to the new gTso tshang Monastery after 1995, but, since it is new and small,
Rin spungs Monastery still supports it and sends teachers whenever needed and the
monastery has in fact become a branch of Rin spungs. The two monasteries perform
their annual rituals together.
4. Hierarchical system
-dgon bdag, first hereditary
Rin spungs and gTso tshang have two common dge skos: the senior dge skos
from Rin spungs and the junior one from gTso tshang. They are both replaced every
two years. There are two dbu mdzad both from Rin spungs since the two monasteries
perform all their rituals together. The monasteries have two common spyi ba (or
gnyer pa) and two mchod dpon who are replaced every two years.
6/7. Current education and educational exchange
For the reasons mentioned above the monastery maintains close ties with Rin
spungs and the monks go there to study,
8/9. Rituals
The monks go to Rin spungs Monastery (No.200) for major rituals.
The monks of Rin spungs also come to gTso tshang Monastery for certain
rituals such as the recitation ceremony of the Ma tri from the 23rd day of the 4th
month to the 1st day of the 5th month with a 'cham dance on the last day. The
monastery also performs a number of rituals alone: The rNam rgyal stong mchod
from the 2nd to the 5th day of the 5th month, the ritual cycle of Ma rgyud from the
6th to the 9th day of the 5th month and the ritual cycle of sTag la for five days in the
11th month (no fixed dates).
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has no books for common use; the monks have their own books.



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
11. Economic circumstances of the monastery
The monastery has no regular source of income and depends on offerings from
the faithful. The monks provide their own food.
12. Local community
The local lay community consists of four villages: Bar rong with about twenty
families; 'Phen 'dzin with twelve families, Chu lung tshur ta with seventeen
families, Lung tshang with twenty-four families and gTso tshang with eleven
families.
13. Local festivals
The la btsas on the mountain behind the monastery is called bra shis. Its
renewal ceremony is performed by the monks on the 1st day of the the 1st month
and the 4th day of the 5th month.
There are two la btsas of the four villages. One is called gSas mkhar and
the other Nor bu. They are situated on a mountain of the local deity. The deity is
propitiated by the village people on the 1st day of the 1st month and the 4th day of
the 5th month.
The monks and local lay community also join other villages in the region to
venerate the two sacred mountains, Bya dur and Dung ri. (cf. sNa steng Monastery
No.199).
14. Occupation of the local people
Farming and trading
Sources
(1) Interview with skal bzang (b.1930) in autumn 1998
(2) Texts:
- Tso tshang dgon pa smin grol bstan rgyas gling gi dkar chag snang gsal me
long by Shes rab mthar phyin in Zing (zung) chu rdzongs dgon pa so sogs
(so'i) dkar chag, Mimeograph, 1993, p.258
635



@
County Seat
o
District Seat
636
*
Bya dur
ang program u
g
Township Seat
Administrative Village
Monastery
Mountain
County Border
Township Border
River
rus dar gasgling
ung-druls darrgyas-gling
rMe-ba County
gSal-churskyang-tshane
Khri-smon
Road
Remiantismon
A-gling Tso-tsbang
g
er-mtsho
Footpath
Rispune
ndodh
1/760,000
1 Zung.chu, County
A-stang
Nyan-yul
Song pan
Khams-skyong
putihar-chiúng stod pa
mChod-ren
Mu-dge
Mad-pa
bDe-skyld
Pha-tnthanh
Glare
Barahing
Hung-isa
Zhang-ngu-khog
Zhang-agu ger den
Dwags-po
Pop-ro
Zbo-zhin
Yokren-cang-kon
Khro-chu County



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(199) Na steng Monastery
(200) Rin spungs Monastery



(201) sNang zhig Monastery
(202) skyang tshang Monastery
638



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
(203) mkhar yag Monastery
(204) Glaro Monastery
639



(205) Sergling Monastery
(206) Sa brug Monastery
640



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal. Gansu and Sichuan
(207) Brag 9-yung drung Hermitage
(208) dGa' mal Monastery
641



1998,
(209) New dGa' mal Monastery
(210) gTso tshang Monastery
642



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
gZi tsha sde dgu County
This is a place originally called Khod po valley (Khod po khog). It was
called Nan ping in Chinese in the periods of 1953 to 1959 and 1962 to 1999 as a
administrative county, and received its present name in 1999. The "Nine Villages of
the descendants of the gZi clan" (gZi tsha sde dgu) are ancient tribes of rGyal rong
in Amdo.
gZi tsha sde dgu County is located in rNga ba Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture,
Sichuan Province. There are 123 villages in the county divided between 19
townships. The county covers an area of 5,289.83 sq km. The population is 47,779
(10,854 of whom were Tibetans in 1980). The county seat is gZi tsha sde dgu and is
576 km from "Bar khams, the capital of Nga ba Prefecture,
(211) rTsub ma Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is rTsub ma gYung drung dar rgyas gling or rTsub
ma sTag skyong g Yung drung dar rgyas gling.
2. Location
The monastery is located 120 km northwest of gZi tsha sde dgu, the county
seat.
3. History
The monastery was founded by bsTan pa tshul khrims (1897-1968) in 1939.
He was succeeded by g Yung drung phun tshogs (b. 1933), the present head of the
monastery. It was reconstructed in 1984. It was destroyed again by fire and was
rebuilt in 1991.
4. Hierarchical system
- one grwa tshang bla ma, elected
- two dbu mdzad
- two dge skos
- two spyi ba
All the incumbents besides the grwa tshang bla ma are replaced every two
years.
5. Current number of monks
There were thirty-two novices and monks in the monastery in 1998,
643



6. Current education
There are no organized classes. The young novices are trained by the elder
monks.
7. Educational exchange
Since the monastery was closely connected with A skyid skyang tshang
(No.194) and sGur skyang (No.196) Monasteries in the past, Dri med 'od zer, the
head of these monasteries, looks after rTsub ma Monastery, and the monks go to his
monasteries for their ordination and the three-year retreat (lo gsum).
8/9. Rituals
- 1st month: the smon lam prayer from the 5th to the 10th day based on the
g Yung drung klong rgvas
- 2nd month: the ritual based on the Yi dam kun 'dus from the 9th to the 22nd
day
- 3rd month: the observance of the smyung gnas abstinence from the 14th to the
16th day
- 4th month: the ritual based on the gYung drung klong rgyas from the 14th and
15th day
- 5th month: commemoration of sKyang sprul Nam mkha'rgyal mtshan from
the 21st to 22nd day
- 6th month: the ritual based on the gYung drung klong rgyas from the 14th to
15th day
- 9th month: the srung bzlog rite based on the ritual cycles of sTag la and Phur
pa from the 1st to the 3rd day
11. Income and expenses
The monastery has no regular source of income and depends on offerings from
its followers. The monks provide their own food.
12. Local community
The local lay community of the monastery (lha sde) consists of Tsub ma gong
ma and Tsub ma 'og ma communities. Tsub ma gong ma comprises four villages:
Tong phrug with ten families, rTa ro with five families, 'Dre bu with fourteen
families and Tang be with three families.
Tsub ma 'og ma comprises five villages: 1Tong phrug with twelve families, rTa
ro with seven families, 'Dre bu with nine families, Bla 'og with five families and
Tang be with five families.
644



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
13. Local festivals
The mountain behind the monastery is called sByin 'bum regarded as the abode
of Bya dur mgo, the local deity. There is a la bisas named g Yung drung nor bu. Its
renewal ceremony takes place on the 3rd of the 9th month. Another mountain called
rTsub ma brag dkar with its la bstas is located at 5 km west of the monastery. Its
renewal ceremony takes place on the 1st of the 3rd month.
The people from this region also participate in the veneration of Mount
Shar Dung ri and the lake Dung ri gSer mtsho. These are sacred sites of Bon and
renowned for their beauty. They are located in Shar khog, 247 km east of the
monastery. Mount Byang Bya dur, another sacred site in Shar khog is 187 km east of
the monastery (cf. Na steng Monastery No.199).
14. Occupation of the local people
Agriculture
Sources
(1) Interview in autumn 1998 with gYung drung phun tshogs (b.1933), the present
head of the monastery
(2) Texts:
- Nan phing rdzong rtsub ma dgon pa'i lo rgyus mdor bsdus, NK GL p.258
- Si khron zhing chen rnga ba bod rigs rang skyong khul nan phing rdzong gi
sa cha'i ming brus, published by Nan phing rdzong gi sa ming 'go khrid tshan
chung, 1983
(212) Dar rgyas Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is Khod po gYung drung dar rgyas gling,
2. Location
The monastery is located 54 km east of gZi tsha sde dgu, the county seat and is
accessible by car.
3. History
After several unsuccessful attempts, Dar rgyas Monastery was the first Bonpo
monastery to have been founded in the Khod po area. It was founded by Khod
po skal bzang nyi ma in the 10th Rab byung (1567-1626). The monastery was
maintained by his descendants as the successive heads of the monastery:
1. Khod po skal bzang nyi ma
645



2. bsTan 'dzin rgyal mtshan
3. Nam mkha'rgyal po
4. Shes rab blo gros
5. Yu bo
The fifth is the present head of the monastery. He was studying at Brag g-yung
drung Hermitage (No.207) in Shar khog under the master Khyung g-yang when
I visited Dar rgyas Monastery in autumn 1998. Since he is too young to take on
his responsibilities, Phun tshogs 'od zer, a master from the Bon 'khor lineage of
Rab den Monastery (No.215) in the same county, was invited to look after the
monastery. The monastery was rebuilt in the 1980s.
4. Hierarchical system
- one dgon bdag
- two dbu mdzad
- two dge skos
- two spyi ba
- two mchod dpon
All the incumbents besides the dgon bdag are replaced every three years.
5. Current number of monks
There were eighty-five novices and monks in the monastery in autumn 1998
6. Current education
There are no organized classes. The young novices are trained by the elder
monks.
7. Educational exchnage
The monastery has no particular ties with any other monastery.
8/9. Rituals
- 1st month: commemoration of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan from the
2nd to the 6th day
- 2nd month: the ritual cycle of Phur pa from the 5th to the 9th day
- 3rd month: recitation of Ma tri from the 7th to the 16th day with the 'cham
dance on the 15th day
- 5th month: Nam rgyal stong mchod from the 11th to the 13th day
- 9th month: the ritual cycle of sTag la from the 25th to the 29th day with the
dgu gtor rite on the 29th day
646



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has one printed copy of the Bonpo Kanjur.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery has no regular source of income and depends on offerings from
the faithful. The monks provide their own food.
12. Local community
The local lay community of the monastery consists of eight communities
scattered over a large area: Ba stod community comprising three villages known
collectively as Ba stod khag gsum: Ba yo village with fourteen families, Bu
'bo with forty-two families and rTsa zhol with thirty-two families. Khyung chag
community comprising three villages: Bo skong with twenty-five families, Tshe
skong with eighteen families and Pur ngo with twenty-two families. Lang chen
community comprising Lang chen village with forty-two families. Nyang tan
community comprising Nyang tan village with twenty-five families. Gro rtsi
community comprising two villages: Gro rtsi with twenty-seven families and Cho
ba with thirty families, g Tsang tsha community comprising three villages: Yang
yan with twenty-eight families, Gu sras with forty families and Brul tshang with
twenty-eight families. 'Phan po community comprising two villages: 'Phan po
with fifteen families and mKhar mdo with thirty families. mDzo lo community
comprising mDzo lo village with twenty families.
13. Local festivals
Mount Khod rtse behind the monastery is believed to be a sacred mountain
associated with Margyud. There is a la btsas called gSas mkhar located on the
mountain's summit. Its renewal ceremony takes place on the 1st day of the Sth
month. There is also a sacred mountain (gnas ri) called ICam sras dom mgo 2
km west of the monastery that was sanctified by skyang 'phags and venerated on
the 1st, 8th and 15th days of any month, because the propitiating date is already
unknown
gNyan chen bla ma snang rtse, a mountain located 1 km north of the monastery
is regarded as the abode of a local deity of the same name. A la btsus called Sa stag
is dedicated to him and is propitiated by the monastery on the 29th of the 9th month.
Ba stod and Nyang tan communities share the same la btsas on the 15th day of
the 5th month. The la btsas of Khyung chags community is renewed on the 13th day
of the 5th month. The la btsas dedicated to gNyan chen Pe tis stag mgo, the local
deity is renewed by the Lang chen community on the 11th day of the 4th month. The
la brsas called Mo skyong of Gro rtsi community is renewed on the 10th day of the
4th month. The la bisas called Brag mkhar of g Tsang tsha community is renewed on
647



the 15th day of the 3rd month. The la btsas called Bya dkar of 'Phan po community
is renewed on the 11th day of the 3rd month. The la btsas named I Ha khang gdong
of mDzo lo community has no fixed date for its renewal ceremony.
The people of this area also venerate Mount Bya dur and Dung ri, the two most
important sacred mountains in Shar khog, the neighboring county (cf. sNa steng
Monastery No.199).
14. Occupation of the local people
Agriculture
Sources
(1) Interviews in autumn of 1998 with the following monks at the monastery: bsTan
pa 'od zer (b.1944), skal bzang mam rgyal (b.1953) and skal bzang tshul khrims
(b.1940)
(2) Texts:
- Nan phing rdzong dar rgyas dgon pa'i lo rgyus mdor bsdus in rNga khul gyi
dgon pa'i lo rgyus, NKHGL p.260
Notes
1 The Nan phing rdzong dar rgyas dgor pa'i lo rgyus mdor bsdus provides a different list
of the monastery's lineage masters: 1) skal bzang nyi ma, 2) Nyi ma 'od zer, 3) Mon
lam, 4) bs Tan 'dzin rgyal mtshan, 5) Phun tshogs 'od zer (NKGL p.260). The dates
of these masters are also given, but they do not seem to be reliable enough to mention
here. I found no historical record of the monastery and the monks do not have any clear
knowledge on the subject.
(213) Sa dbus Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is Sa dbus bkra shis phun tshogs gling also called
Sa dbus g Yung drung 'phel rgyas dgon. Sa dus is the name of the community
where the monastery is located. It is also spelt Sa 'ug, Sa 'u or Sa yul.
2. Location
The monastery is located 116 km northwest of the county seat of gZhi tsha sde
dgu.
3. History
According to oral tradition, the monastery was founded by sKyang 'phags, a
Bonpo saint of Amdo who was very active in the 2nd Rab byung (1087-1146). It is a
648



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
branch of Sam 'grub Monastery (No.197) in mozod dge, but no historical records
have been found. Since the assembly hall ('du khang) served as the village's granary
during the Cultural Revolution, it has survived and was restored in the 1980s.
4. Hierarchical system
- one dbu mdzad
- two dge skos
- two spyi ba
- one bsang gtong, apart from performing the bsang ceremony, he also executes
other religious services such as the bskang 'don at the monastery. All the
incumbents are replaced every two years.
5. Current number of monks
There were twenty-five novices and monks in the monastery in autumn 1998.
6. Current education
There are no organized classes. The young novices are trained by the elder
monks.
7. Educational exchange
The monastery maintains ties with the monasteries that are historically related
to skyang 'phags, i.e. A skyid Kyang tshang (No.194), sGur skyang (No.196) and
bSam 'grub (No.197).
8/9. Rituals
- 1st month: mChod pa stong mtshan on the 15th and 16th days
- 2nd month: mChod pa stong mtshan on the 15th and 16th days
- 3rd month: Ti tri su and Ma tri alternately from the 1st to the 8th day; mChod
pa stong mtshan on the 15th and 16th days
- 4th month: the smyung gnas fast from the 15th to the 17th day
- 5th month: mChod pa stong mtshan from the Ist to the 16th day
- 6th month: commemoration of sKyang sprul Nam mkha'rgyal mtshan on the
21st and 22nd days
- 10th month: Birth anniversary of sKyang sprul Nam mkha' rgyal mtshan on
the 15th day
- 12th month: the ritual cycles of sTag la, Phur pa and Khro bo in alternance
from the 21st to 30th day with the cham dances on the 28th and 29th days
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has no texts; some of the monks have their own books for ritual
649



purposes.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery has no regular source of income. It depends on offerings from
its followers. The monks provide their own food.
12. Local community
The Local lay community of the monastery is called Sa dbus consisting of four
villages: sMe ba with fifteen families, Rong le with fourteen families, Bla sgrub with
thirteen families and Tho sgrub with ten families.
13. Local festivals
There are two la btsas on the hill Gad pa stag mgo located 3 km north of the
monastery: the renewal ceremony of the one situated on the upper part of the hill is
performed by both monks and lay people and the one located on the lower part is
renewed by the lay people alone on the 11th day of the 4th month.
The la btsas named brTse bzer east of the monastery is renewed by both lay and
religious communities on the 3rd of the 9th month.
There are also four la btsas. Each one has its own name: the one south of the
monastery is called dByar dus nor bu or dByar dus cog shing and the three to the
north, 'Dod 'jo nor bu, dPal rtsal seng ge and Shi mda'. Their renewal ceremony is
performed by the lay people of the four villages on the 11th day of the 4th month.
Both laymen and monks venerate Mount Bya dur and Mount Dung ri in Shar
khog (cf. sNa steng Monastery No.199).
14. Occupation of the local people
Agriculture
Sources
(1) Interview in autumn 1998 with: g Yung drung tshul khrims (alias Klu 'bum
'brug, b.1952), a monk at the monastery
(2) Texts:
- Nan phing rdzong gi sa yul dgon pa'i lo rgvus mdor bsdus in rNga ba khul gvi
dgon pa'l lo rgyus, NKGL p.259
(214) IDong dpal Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is Dong dpal gYung drung me tog gling. IDong
650



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
dpal is the name of the community where the monastery is located. A variant
spelling is gDong dpe.
2. Location
The monastery is located 145 km northwest of the county seat of gZi tsha sde
dgu.
3. History
The monastery was founded by bsTan pa 'brug grags, a master of Sam 'grub
Monastery (No.197) in mDzod dge. No written records on the monastery's history
have been found. The monastery was rebuilt in the 1980s. mChog grub dpal bzang,
the head of bSam grub Monastery in mDzod dge is also the dgon bdag of IDong
dpal Monastery
4. Hierarchical system
- one dgon bdag
- one dbu mdzad
- two dge skos
- two spyi ha
All the incumbents besides the dgon bdag are replaced every two years.
5. Current number of monks
There were twenty-two novices and monks in the monastery in autumn 1998.
6. Current education
There are no organized classes. The young novices are trained by the elder
monks.
7. Educational exchange
The monastery has close ties with bSam 'grub Monastery in mDzod dge.
8/9. Rituals
- 1st month: commemoration of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan from the
5th to the 14th days
- 3rd month: mChod pa stong mtshan on the 1st and 2nd days
- 4th month: the smyung gnas fast on the 15th and 16th days
- 5th month: mChod pa stong mtshan from the 14th to the 16th days
- 8th month: traditionally the ritual based on the r7sa gsum is performed from
the 21st to the 25th day, but because none of the present monks know how to
perform it, they recite the mChod pa stong mtshan instead



- 10th month: propitiation of the religious protectors (bka'skyong) on the 17th
day and the renewal ceremony of the la btsas 18th day
- 12th month: the ritual cycles of sTag la, Phur pa and Khro bo alternately from
the 21st to the 30th day with the cham dances on the 28th and 29th days
11. Income and expenses
The monastery has no regular source of income and depends on offerings from
the faithful. The monks provide their own food.
12. Local community
There are six villages in Dong dpal community: Thang dga' with twelve
families, Bya tshang with eleven families, sDong bar with thirteen families, Thang
sna with eleven families, mDo skong with twelve families and Yar lung with
eighteen families.
13. Local festivals
The mountain behind the monastery is regarded as sacred and is called g Yung
drung gsas mkhar. Its la btsas is renewed by the monks on the 10th day of the 12th
month.
The renewal ceremony of the following la btsas: The la btsas called IDong
nags tsho sman of Thang dga' village is renewed by the village people three times a
year: on the 11th day of the 4th month, the 4th day of the 5th month and the 21st day
of the 11th month. The la btsas of Bya tshang village is acalled gSas mkhar, the la
btsus of sDong bar village Nang skya bstan 'dzin (there is a motorable road leading
to it); the la btsas of Thang sna village rDung ri rtse and the la btsas of mDo skong
village Cang gsas dus log. Yar lung village has four la btsas: gSas mkhar, 'Brug
mgo, gNyan chen zhwa smug and gSas mkhar nor bu. The renewal ceremony of all
the above-mentioned la btsas is performed by the people of their respective villages
twice a year, on the 11th of the 5th month and the 17th day of the 10th month.
The la btsas gNyan chen Grung Iha rgad po of IDong dpal village is renewed
once a year on the following days in alternance: the 11th day of the 4th month, the
4th day of 5th month, the 15th day of the 6th month and the 17th of the 10th month.
The people of the lay community also travel and participate in the veneration of
Mounts Bya dur and Dung ri in Shar khog (cf. Na steng Monastery No.199).
14. Occupation of the local people
Agriculture
Sources
(1) Interview in autumn 1998 with: gYung drung blo gros (alias Ya go, b.1942), a
652



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
monk at the monastery
(2) Texts:
- Nan phing rdzong gi gdong dpe dgon pa'i lo rgyus mdor bsdus, NKGL
pp.259-260
(215) Rab den Monastery
1. Name
The monastery's full name is Rab dben bkra shis phun tshogs gling. Since the
monastery is located in rDza gzhi community it is also known as rDza gzhi dgon.
2. Location
The monastery is located 41 km west of the county seat of gZi tsha sde dgu
which is renowned for its scenic beauty,
3. History
The date of the monastery's foundation remains uncertain. According to oral
tradition, it has a history of 1100 years. Bon mkhar skal bzang rin chen, the present
head of the monastery, has recorded an oral account according to which the original
temple was founded by Drang srong Nyi ma thag 'dogs. This sage is regarded as a
descendant of kong tsha dbang ldan, one of the offspring of gShen rab Mi bo. The
Bon mkhar lineage therefore claimes to be descended from gShen rab Mi bo.
bsTan 'dzin rgyal mtshan, the twenty-first of the Bon mkhar lineage, moved the
temple to the present site in 1573, and extended the establishment into a monastery
which he named Rab dben bra shis phun tshogs gling, but the history of the
establishment before his time remains obscure. However, the account of Bon mkhar
skal bzang rin chen gives a list of the heads of the monastery, but it is incomplete:
1. Drang srong Nyi ma thag 'dogs
2-20. The names are missing.
22. Nam dag tshul khrims
23. bsTan 'dzin Ihun grub
24. Tshe dbang Ihun grub
25. bsTan pa dar rgyas
26. Hun grub dbang rgyal
27. bs Tan 'dzin dbang rgyal
28. Rin chen rgyal mtshan
29. gYung drung tshul khrims
30. Sang rgyas tshul khrims (1936-1959)
31. skal bzang rin chen (b.1964), the present head of the monastery. The
653



monastery was rebuilt in the 1980s.
4. Hierarchical system
-dgon bdag, hereditary
- two dbu mdzad
- two dge skos
- three mchod dpon
- two spyi ba, no predetermined term of office
All the incumbents besides the dgon bdag are replaced every two years.
5. Current number of monks
There are sixty-one novices and monks in the monastery.
6. Current education
There are no organized classes. The young novices are trained by the elder
monks.
8/9. Rituals
The monastery performs only two rituals: commemoration of mNyam med
Shes rab rgyal mtshan from the 3rd to the 6th day of the 1st month; Ma tri sgrub
chen from the 7th to the 16th day of the 4th month with the 'cham dances on the
15th day.
10. Books held in the monastery
The monastery has one printed copy of Bonpo Kanjur.
11. Income and expenses
The monastery has no regular source of income and depends on offerings from
the faithful. The monks provide their own food.
12. Local community
There are several communities scattered among eight villages: 'Brong khams
community comprises four villages: 'Bar yul mkhar with forty-three families, mDa'
'bur with six families, mDa' 'joms with eleven families and Bod nang with thirteen
families.
Khyung yag community comprises two villages: Khyung yag with thirty-five
families and Nye kho with twelve families.
gNyan rtsa community comprises gNyan rtsa with forty families; Ngo stod has
one village: rDzong nang with thirty-seven families; Kyong te community comprises
four villages: Phar phyin with twelve families, bDe chen with forty families, Sa cha
654



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
with twenty families and Ha li with eighteen families:
gZi tsha sde dgu community comprises nine villages: Dze tsha ba with sixty
families, Zhu ce with forty families, He dga' with seven families, Bo bzo with forty
families, 'Phel ya with thirty families, rGyal 'phel with twelve families, rGu ba with
nine families, 'Phan po with twenty-six families and Phong bze ge with thirty-seven
families. In addition, there are several families scattered in various townships: Chu
dkar, A lo, Ma ca, Lodbyi, Wu'u c'o and rТsa thang.
13. Local festivals
There is a sacred mountain (gnas ri) called Dza gzhi brag dkar located 3 km
east of the monastery, with a motorable road leading to it. It was revealed by skyang
sprul Nam mkha'rgyal mtshan and is venerated by the people of the villages on the
15th and 30th day of the 6th month.
In addition they also go and participate in the veneration of Mounts Bya dur
and Dung ri, the two most important sacred mountains of Bon in Shar khog (cf. Na
steng Monastery No.199).
14. Occupation of the local people
Agriculture
Sources
(1) Interview in autumn 1998 with: Bon mkhar skal bzang rin chen (b.1963), the
present head of the monastery
(2) Texts:,
- Nan phing rdzong gi rab dben dgon pa'i lo rgyus mdor bsdus, NKGL
pp.260-266
Notes
1 Zha ru si (rou wen gong ba) gai kuang (A General Introduction to rDza gzhi Monastery
[rab dben dgon pa]) by Bon mkhar skal bzang rin chen, written in Chinese, MS., p.1.
2 Concerning the succession of the Bon mkhar bla ma and their dates, Nan phin rdzong gi
rab dben dgon pa'i lo rgyus mdor bsdus provides a different list of the masters and their
dates after the transference of the temple to the present site, but it is too confused to quote
here.
655



The-bo County
Brug-chu County
1
stigacions
Pub-SorTsub-os
Sa-dbu
Tag-lo
mDzod-dge
Dong-dpal
gzisha sde - dgu County
Khed pa khog)
Chu-nag-thung zam-chenChu-dkar
Tha Ishane gYang-grol
tel Der er
Thu-aber
"Phen-play
Brong khams
Rub-dben
Dza-ron
Ndes-slod
d Mag-mkhar
Zung-chu County
( Shar-khog )
County Seat
District Seat
Township Seat
Administrative Village
Monastery
County Border
Township Border
River
Road
-
Footpath
1/600,000
656



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
(211) Tsub ma Monastery
(212) Dar rgyas Monastery
657



(213) Sa dbus Monastery
(214) Dong dpal Monastery
658



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
(215) Rab den Monastery
659



Wen chuan County
Wen chuan county is located in rNga ba Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture,
Sichuan Province. There are 18 townships subdivided into 126 villages. The county
covers an area of 3,958.27 sq km. The population was 82,830 in 1980: 5,516
Tibetans and 17,322 Qiang. The county town is located at Wei zhou Township 246
km from 'Bar khams, the capital of Nga ba Prefecture.
(216) Bla ma Temple
Bla ma Temple is located 110 km south of the county seat of Wen chuan,
two-kilometer walk up the mountain to reach the monastery. Wen chuan is a county
of rNga ba Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture in Sichuan Province.
Since the Tibetans in the area are completely sinicized and no longer speak
Tibetan, they use even Chinese names, although they acknowledge that they are
Tibetans. The founder of the temple remains unknown. When I visited the site in
1998, the caretaker of the temple, an old Tibetan man called Ma Qingyun, who had
been a soldier in the Long March, was the only person there who knew how to read
some Tibetan. The temple was rebuilt in the 1980s.
Only a small number of lay practitioners occasionally come to the temple to
worship and make offerings. Ma Qingyun occasionally performs simple rituals for
local families when requested. The temple has two copies of the gSer 'od nor bu 'od
'bar (xylographic edition), and one manuscript volume of various ritual texts.
Economic circumstances of the temple depends on offerings from the faithful
Many people come to the temple to worship and make offerings although there is no
local community as such.
Occupation of the local population is farming,
Source
(1) Interview in autumn 1998 with: Ma Qingyun (b.1918)
060



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai. Gansu and Sichuan
(217) mChog gsum Temple
Since the Tibetans in the Wen chuan area have been completely sinicized, most
of them call the temple by its Chinese name, Sansheng Miao, (a literal translation
of mChog gsum lha khang). The temple is located on the road 110 km south of the
county town of Wen chuan.
According to oral tradition, originally there was a Guan di Miao, a temple
dedicated to the Chinese deity Guan di. Sang rgyas dpal Idan, a Bonpo master
from Central Tibet enshrined a statue of gShen rab Mi bo as the main statue of the
temple together with two other statues — relegating the Guan di statue among the
secondary deities and transformed the establishment into a Bonpo temple named
Chog sum nha khang.
There were no lay devotees when I visited the temple in 1998, only an old
lady looking after it. I was told that she was a Tibetan, from Chu chen in Gyal
rong, and now she was the caretaker of the temple. The temple was rebuilt in the
nineteen-eighties. It has close ties with g Yung drung dar rgyas Monastery (No.170)
in Rong brag county. The local people invite five monks from gYung drung dar
rgyas Monastery to perfome an annual ritual on the 15th day of the 2nd month every
year.
Since there are no other religious activities apart from the ritual mentioned
above, very few people come to the temple. Indeed many of the villagers have not
been to the temple for years and don't even know to which religious tradition it
belongs.
Sources
(1) Interview in autumn 1998 with: Xiao Shufang, the caretaker of the temple who
was around seventy years old when I visited the place (she did not know the year
of her birth)
(2) Texts:
- Wen chuan rdzong gi sa cha'i ming btus compiled and printed by Wen chuan
rdzong gi sa cha'i ming btus las don'go khrid tsho chung, P.1, Wei zhou,
1982
661



Mao-wen County
dBus
(Wei zhou)
Li County
Guan County
Wen chuan County
Geng-da
County Seat
@
Township Seat
o
Administrative Village
Bla-maligon Wo-long
Chuan-bel-yings (Hua-hong-shu)
mChog-gedin Iha-khang
Monastery
County Border
Township Border
River
Road
Footpath
1/520,000
662



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
(216) Bla ma Temple
(217) mChog gsum Temple
663



(218) La tha Temple
1. Name
The temple is also called A lo Temple. This name of the temple is said to be
Mongolian, since the temple's devotees are mainly of Mongolian origin and are said
to be descendants of a Mongolian army.
2. Location
The temple is located 120 km from the county town of Yanyuan, which is part
of Liangshan Yi Autonomous Prefecture in Sichuan Province.
3. History
When I went to visit the region I was unable to reach the temple owing to
floods that had destroyed the road to Yan yuan county. I was unable to find any
written source concerning the temple's history (and I doubt that any exist). In
Xichang, the capital of Liangshan Prefecture, I met one aged woman from the
village where the temple is located. She told me that according to a legend the
temple was founded in the 13th century. The devotees of this temple are mainly
Mongolians but also include some Tibetans and Naki, and even some Yi, another
ethnic group living in the area. The Mongolian army, of which the present
Mongolians are said to be the descendants, arrived in the region in the 17th century
with Gushri Khan. In the past, the temple was looked after by the leading Mongolian
family, whose eldest son inherited his father's position as chief, while the second
and third sons became the gnyer ba and head of the temple respectively. When
there were not enough sons, the incumbents were chosen from among the family's
relatives. The temple was rebuilt in the nineteen-eighties.
4. Hierarchical system
There is one dge skos and one dbu mdzad, both replaced every three years.
5. Current number of devotees
There are one hundred and twenty-nine tantric practitioners who work as
farmers and live with their families and only go to the temple to perform the annual
rituals.
6. Current education
The younger practioners are trained by the elder practitioners,
7. Educationa exchange
Since it is the only Bonpo temple in the area, it has no direct ties with any other
664



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan
temple.
8/9. Rituals
- 1st month: the smon lam prayer from the 10th to the 20th day
- 4th month: the smyung gnas fast from the 1st to the 16th day
- 8th month: the minatsho ritual from the 6th to the 11th day
- 9th month: the dursetshok ritual from the 26th day to the 29thday, this is
followed by the gelacha ritual.
The terms minatsho, dutsetshok and gelacha are said to be the Mongolian
names for the rituals, but none of the people whom I interviewed in Xichang knew
what they meant.
11. Income and expenses
The temple has no regular source of income and depends on offerings from its
followers.
12. Local community
About 5,000 Mongolian, Tibetan and Naki in the area
14. Occupation of the local people
Farming
Source
(1) Interview in autumn 1998 with: Wang Wenzhi, a Mongolian woman who comes
from the village where the temple is located and who works at the Department of
Minorities and Religion of Liangshan Prefecture government.
665



Abbreviations
BHMT
Brief History of Monastories in Dihu (Tewo), in Chinese, by Yanglen Dorje
in The bo rig gras lo rgyus dpyad gzhi'i yig cha (Deb gnyis pa). Edited by the
Editing Commitee for Historical Accounts of Past Events of the CPPCC of
Tewo County of Gannan Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture, 1994
BLKM
Bod kyi lo ngyus kun dga'i me long by dMu dge bSam gtan in Rig gnas lo rgyu
dpyad yig bdams bsgrigs of mga ba Chang and Tibetan Autonous Prefecture
(Deb Inga ba). Edited and published by the CPPCC of Nga ba Chang and
Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture in Sichuan Province. 'Bar khams, 1987.
BGLD
Bon brgya dgon sman ribshad sgrub smin grol gling gi lo rgvus mdor bsdus by
Bon brgya de legs hun grub rgya mtsho, MS.
BBD
Byang bya dur by Gra dpal, Mineograph. Zung chu, 87 pages.
CNTK
bDe bar gshegs pa'i bka 'i dgongs 'grel bstan boos 'gyur ro cog par du sgrub
pa' ishul las nye bar brtsams pa'i gtam yang dag par briod pa dkar chag yid
bzhin nor bu'l phreng ba (or Co ne'i bstan 'gyur dkar chag) by Kun mkhyen
'Jigs med dbang po. Kansu mi rigs dpe skrun khang. Lanzhou, 1986.
DBSI
Di pujing nei ben jiao si yuan gai kuang jtan jie (A brief presentation of Bonpo
monasteries in Thebo area) by Tshe ring bkra shis. Tibetan Studies, Chinese
edition. Lhasa, 1996.
DMCB
mDo smad chos 'hyung or Debther rgya misho by Brag dgon pa don mchog
bstan pa rab rgyas. Kansu mi rigs dpe skrun khang. Lanzhou, 1982.
Donrup Lhagyal, Bonpo Family Lineages in Central Tibet, in Samten G. Karmay and
Yasuhiko Nagano ed., New Horizons in Bon Studies, National Museum of
Ethnology, Osaka, 2000, pp.429-508.
DzNGL
mDzod dge 'l bod brgyud nang bstan dgon sde so so'i lo rgyus mdor bsdus,
compiled by Srid gros mdzod dge rdzong u yon lhan khang rig gnas lo rgyus
dpyad yig khang, Nang khul yig cha, rNga ba Tibetan and Qiang Autonomous
Prefecture, 1999.
GTGN
Gung thang bstan pa 'i sgron me'i rnam thar by dPal mang Pantita. Kan su'u
mi rigs dpe skrun khang. Lanzhou, 1987.
KBTL
Kan lho bod kyi tsho shog lo rgyus mdor bsdus by Ma Denkun and Padma
Dorje, No.11, in Kan lho lo rgyus dpyad gzhi'i yig rigs. Published by the
Editing Commitee for Historical Accounts of Past Events of the CPPCC of
666



Bonpo monasteries and temples in Tibetan regions in Qinghal, Gansu and Sichuan
Gannan Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture. Hezuo (Gtsos), 1994.
KGLG
Khams phyogs dkar mdzes khul gvi dgon sde so so'l lo rgvus gsal bar bshod pa
nang bstan gsal ba'i me long. Compiled by Krung go'i bod kyi shes rig zhib
jug Ite gnas kyi chos lugs lo rgyus zhib 'jug so dang/ Krung go bod brgyud
nang bstan slob gling bod brgyud nang bstan zhib jug khang/ Zi khron zhing
chen dkar mdzes khul chos lugs cud/ dkar tdzes khul yig bsgyur cud las
khungs/ Beijing, in 1995.
KNGL
Kan lho'l bod brgyud nang hstan dgon sde so soi lo rgvus mdor bsdus
(Bar cha), Restricted use. Compiled by Wanggyal. The Editing Committee
for Historical Accounts of Past Events of the CPPCC of Gannan Tibetan
Autonomous Prefecture. Hezuo (Gtsos), 1993.
KhKRZ
Khri ka 'l rig gnas lo rgvus. Compiled by Srid gros khri ka rdzong khong mi
Ihan tshogs rig gnas lo rgryus khang, unofficial publication. Xining, 1996,
KTGN
gShen gyi dge sbyong khri ka ba kun bzang butan pa'i rgyal mtshan gyi mnam
thar by Bra ser Pantita Kun bzang bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan (autobiograghy
incomplete), MS.
KTSD
Kan su zhing cher the ho rdzong sa ming byung ishul gyi deb ther (Nang khul
rgyu cha) by the Group of General Survey of Place's Names in Tewo County
Tewo, 1987
NKGL
Nga ba khul gyi dgon pa'i lo rgvus (temporary title) by the Religion Bureau
and the Buddhist Association of Nga ba Tibetan and Qiang Nationalities
Autonomous Prefecture in Sichuan Province, MS.
NBBK
gNas mchog brag dkar bya rgod kyi dkar chag man shel gong bu'i 'khor lo by
Hor btsun bsTan 'dzin blo gros rgya mtsho in Nga ba khul gvi gnas yig (Vol.1),
pp. 121-140. The Office of Edition and Translation of Apa (Rnga ba) Tibetan
Autonomous Prefecture in Sichuan Province.
NMKD
gNas chen dnu riseng ge yongs rdzogs bkra shis lha yi mdun sa zhes pa'i dkar
chag gnas kyi Ide mig by Tshul khrims rnam dag in rNga ba khul gyi gnas yig
(Vol.2), pp. 151-235, The Office of Edition and Translation of Apa (Rnga ba)
Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture in Sichuan Province.
SZNT
Je btshun bla ma dam pa nges pa don gyi g-yung drung 'chang dbang dpal
shar rdza ba chen po bkra shis rgyal mishan dpal bzang po 'l ram par thar pa
ngo mtshar nor bu'l phreng ba thar "dod mkhas pa'i mgul rgyan by dBra ston
bskal bzang bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan (1897-1959). Beijing: Krung go bod kyi
shes rig dpe skrun khang, 1990.
667



TGLG
g7o tshang dgon pa'i lo rgyus by IDong rigs pa A skal, MS. This text is written
down from just memory in 1983.
TGLR
Te zhig gam rtse dbus dgon pa'l lo rgvus rags isam zhu ba by Shes rab bstan
pa'i zla ba. MS.
TLPY
The bo rig gray lo rgyus kyi dpyad gzhi i yig cha (Die bu wen shi ziliao), Vol.2.
Edited by Yanglin Dorje, in Chinese. Unofficial publication. Thewo,1994.
TSGLNy
m?sho lho khul gyi dgon sde khag gi lo ryyus snying bsdus. Compiled by
mTsho sngon zhing chen mtsho lho bod rigs rang skyong khul nang bstan
mthun tshogs dang krung go'i bod brgyud nang bstan mthorim slob gling nang
bstan zhib 'jug khang, m Tsho sngon mi rigs dpe skrun khang, Ziling (Xining),
1999.
TzGLNY
misho lho bod rigs rang skyong khul gvi dgon sde khag gi lo rgyus snying
bsdus, Compiled by mTsho sngon zhing chen mtsho lho bod rigs rang skyong
khul nang bstan mthun thoga dang krung go'i bod brgyud nang bstan mtho rim
slob gling nang bstan zhib 'jug khang. m Tsho sngon mi rigs dpe skrun khang,
1999, Ziling (Xining).
TZLD
rTse zhig lo rgyus mdor badus by Bon brgya de legs lhun grub rgya mtsho.
MS.
YBTP
gYong drung bon gvi bstan "hyung phyogy bsdus by dPaltshul, Bod ljong mi
rigs dpe skrun khang, Lhasa, 1988.
ZGSK
Zing (zung) chu rdzong dgon pa so sogs (so'l) dkar chag. Compiled by A gling
bsTan 'phel. Mimeograph, 1993.
ZNYZ
Zhuo ni yang tu si zhuan lue (Brief Bibliograghy of Co ne rgyal bo) by Yang
Shihong. Published by Si chuan minority publishing house, 1989, Chengdu.
668



Bonpo monasteries and temples
of the Himalayan region



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
Mustang District
(219) Klu Brag Monastery
The only Bonpo community of any size in Mustang is Klu brag, a village of
ten-and-a-half estates (grong pa) subdivided into fourteen households (khang pa)
and sixteen hearths (me khral). There are also three private temples, in Jomsom,
Nardzong and Dzar, but because they concern only individual families they are not
considered here.
1. Name
The settlement, called Klu brag, is itself sometimes referred to in historical
works as a monastery (dgon pa), rather than just a village. This is probably because
the community is populated by people who are ranked as Priests (bla mchod) in the
social hierarchy of the area, between Nobles (dpon po) and Commoners (phal pa).
There are, however, a number of temples (variously called tha khang and dgon
pa) that are either still functional or derelict and abandoned. The main temple (lha
khang) is called Phun tshogs gling. It is a public institution, and it is here that almost
all the community ceremonies are held.
In addition to Phun tshogs gling, there is another communal temple called
sGom phug dgon pa, "the temple of the meditation cave", situated uphill some
twenty minutes' walk to the south of the main settlement area. And finally, there are
three active private temples:
- two adjoining temples a short distance to the east of the main settlement area,
belonging to the Globo Chos tsong and Ja ra sgang clans
- the bla brang, belonging to the estate of Klu brag's founder, Yang ston bkra
shis rgyal mtshan
There are also a number of caves that are used for meditative retreats.
The village temple, Phun tshogs gling, was founded in the nineteenth century
by Ka ru sGrub dbang bsTan 'dzin rin chen, who was born in western Tibet in 1801
and later developed close links with Klu brag. Gom phug dgon pa is said to have
been built much earlier by the founders of the village in the thirteenth century, or
shortly afterwards. It appears to have been restored a number of times, but most
recently, after its complete collapse, it was rebuilt with a grant from the Danish
Embassy in Kathmandu.
2. Location
Klu brag is one of the nineteen settlements that form the old political enclave
known as Baragaon (Tib. Yul kha bcu gnyis). It is about two hours' walk north of
Jomsom, the headquarters of Mustang District, in Dhaulagiri Zone, on the southern
bank of the Panda Khola, an eastern tributary of the Kali Gandaki.
671



3. History
The early history of Klu brag can be derived from three main sources in the
Tibetan language. The texts are as follows.
1. The first is entitled: "The voice of Brahma, the lineage history of the clan
of the Ya ngal priests which is like sight, the foremost of all the senses". A
manuscript of this book, consisting of fifty-four pages written in Tibetan
script, is kept in the village of Klu brag. It has also been published in India.
The lineage history occupies approximately one half of the text, while the
first part deals with the Bonpo account of the creation of the world. This
work will be referred to below as the Ya ngal dung rabs (YDR).
2. The second source is entitled Dong mang gur gsum gyi rnam thar. This is a
short piece containing brief biographies of several bla mas from the Ya ngal
clan, principally Shes rab rgyal mtshan and his two sons, Dam pa 'bum rje
and bkra shis rgyal mtshan. It has been published in India in a collection
entitled Sources for a History of Bon.
3. The third work is entitled "The biographies of the bla mas of the rDzogs
chen zhang zhung snyan rgyud lineage". It contains the life stories of over
a hundred Bonpo bla mas. It has been published in India under the title of
Bonpo Nispanna Yoga.
The following account will not be a detailed discussion of these texts, but will
summarise the main historical events, and simply outline the lives of the principal
figures. Reference will also be made to certain important historical documents from
Thini and other villages of Panchgaon.
3. 1. The Bon religion enters Mustang
The Ya ngal gdung rabs begins with the divine origin of the Ya ngal lineage at
the time of gNya'khri btsan po. Ya ngal is said to have been one of his three court
priests. The list of descendants, which is too long to discuss here, runs for seventeen
generations from the heads of three main branches, called the Three Gu rib, who
lived in the early eleventh century.
The main history begins in the life of Shes rab rgyal mtshan, who was born in
1077' in the village of sTag rtse byi ri in Upper Tsang, in Tibet, where the Ya ngal
clan had lived for many generations. His father was gSung rab skyabs, who was the
son of mKhas pa sman pa, one of the three lineage heads. According to the Bonpo
Nispanna Yoga:
He had four different names: since he was born thirteen days after the death
of his father he was known as Tshabs ma grags (meaning "the One Called the
Replacement"); his clan was Ya ngal, and so he was known as Yang ston chen
po (meaning "the Great Teacher of the Ya ngal clan"); according to a prophesy
he was an incarnation of sPang la mam gshen, and his given name was Shes



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
rab rgyal mtshan.
During his youth he devoted himself to scholarly pursuits, and Buddhist monks
were unable to defeat him in debate. Later he lived as a yogi in the mountains.
During this period everyone said he had gone mad because he would sit for long
periods staring into space. Once, while he was meditating, a beautiful young woman
came to him and asked him if he was going to visit his teacher. On his inquiring
where his teacher was to be found, the woman replied that he was in the upper part
of the same valley. Here he found a cave containing a woven nest of silken thread.
In this nest was a tiny creature like a monkey which offered him a bronze bowl and
told him to drink from it. He did so, and immediately achieved illumination
After returning to scholarly life, he held a discussion with a certain Se bon
'khro rgyal on certain matters of philosophy. So impressed was he by the bla ma's
knowledge that he decided to study under his teacher, 'Or sgom kun 'dul. After
'Or sgom kun 'dul had initiated Shes rab rgyal mtshan into a part of the Zhang
zhung snyan brgyud, he instructed him to go to Upper mNga'ris, where he would
have two sons and would receive many disciples. About this time there lived in the
village of Bon 'khor in Glo bo a bla ma named Rong rTog med zhig po, who had
many patrons in the area. The story of their meeting is related in Bonpo Nispanna
Yoga:
As he sat there, one of the dice-mantras went: "Rong rTog med zhig po who
sees neither the sun nor the moon". He asked where such a person was. "The
adept of the rDzogs chen zhang zhung snyan rgyud, the great saint in the
monastery high up there in the mountains is the one called Rong rTog med
zhig po, who sees neither the sun nor the moon". On hearing this, boundless
reverence and faith arose in him and he determined to meet the bla ma.
... The same evening, in the early part of the night, a woman came to Rong Tog
med zhig po in a dream. "The incarnation of sPang la mam gshen is coming as
your student. Give him an audience and instruct him thoroughly in the Zhang
zhung snyan brgyud", she commanded. In the second half of the night, a man
came for an audience carrying the equipment of a Bonpo tantrist...
The next morning, a servant said, "a Bonpo who has come from the village of
gDong skya, over there, is asking for an audience". Rong rTog med zhig po
asked what he looked like and was told that his dress and tantric equipment
were such and such, and he said, "The one who appeared in my dream last
night is here."
Shes rab rgyal mtshan received from Rong rTog med zhig po the upper
transmission of the Zhang zhung snyan brgvud.
At this point we may mention another version of these events. This account
was written by the nineteenth-century master Shar rdza bKra shis rgyal mtshan.
It is probably based on the historical sources cited earlier, but the author seems to
673



have added certain details and omitted others in order to create a good story. After
discussing the perseverance shown by many notable scholars in trying to find their
bla mas, he praises them for adhering to their quest without giving a thought to
hardship or suffering":
For example, we should follow the manner of the Great Yang ston's search
for Rong rTog med zhig po. That bla ma, the Great Yang ston, was thoroughly
learned in the Bon doctrines of the Shegyu, and on one occasion a woman
appeared to him him saying, "How learned are you?"
"I am completely learned," he replied, whereupon the woman began weeping
and departed unhappily. The bla ma thought to himself, "When I told her I was
learned she became unhappy. If she appears tomorrow I must tell her I know
nothing," and he waited.
The following day the woman came and spoke to him as before. "I know
nothing at all," he replied, "have you any sort of knowledge you might teach
me?" The woman laughed with happiness.
"If you want to acquire some knowledge, there is one Rong sgom rTog med
zhig po who appears to be living among crags infested by nagas and demons,
seeing neither the sun nor the moon. Go to him, and you will have some great
knowledge to study," she said, and departed. Just to hear this the Great Yang
ston's heart was so filled with joy that he forgot to ask where the bla ma was.
Thinking that the woman would come again on the following day too he
waited, but she did not appear. After a week had elapsed, he thought to himself
that it would be best to go off now in search of the bla ma. He travelled down
to A mdo and Khams, and sought him for three years without finding him. Then
he went up and searched for three years in the middle of Tibet, in dBus and
gTsang, but he did not find him. He then looked in stod mNga' ris for three
years, but did not find him there either.
By now the Great Yang ston was utterly dispirited, and proceeded to return
When he reached the capital of Glo bo sMon thang he met two men who were
playing dice. One of the dice-mantras ran: "The one who sees neither the sun
nor the moon, Rong sgom rTog med zhig po, knows." On hearing this the Great
Yang ston began to tremble. "Now I can meet my bla ma," he thought, and
laughed with joy, but then thought, "Although I have looked for three years
without finding him I may not find him now," and he wept. He asked where that
bla ma known as Rong sgom rTog med zhig po lived, and the two men replied,
"Below here, towards Glo bo sMon thang, among the crags infested by nagas
and demons in the upper part of the valley of Klu brag - there he lives seeing
neither the sun nor the moon. Then he went there and met the bla ma, and after
telling him this story he requested spiritual instructions.
It is interesting that the author of this account names Klu brag as the place



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
where Rong rTog med zhig po lived. In fact the village was not founded until
the next generation, but the mistake may be due to the author's knowledge of the
connection between Klu brag and the Ya ngal lineage.
Ya ngal Shes rab rgyal mtshan died at the age of sixty-five. He had two sons
and a daughter by his third marriage. The elder son, Dam pa 'bum rje 'od, was a
remarkable individual, but there is insufficient space here to discuss his life. It is
with his younger brother, bkra shis rgyal mtshan, that we are mainly concerned.
3.2. Kra shis rgyal mtshan and the founding of Klu brag
bKra shis rgyal mtshan is generally known by the title of 'Gro mgon Klu
bragpa, meaning "the Protector of Living Beings, the Man of Klu brag",
because he was the founder of Klu brag village. The Ya ngal gdung rabs gives
an entertaining description of the event,
bKra shis rgyal mtshan went riding on a mare which had a foal. His patrons
in Kagbeni said goodbye to him on the plateau (Pe Thangka, situated between
Kagbeni and Klu brag). "But you cannot go any further," they said, because it
was an area inhabited by demons,
"My service to living beings is in this place," he replied. The demon of the
place hid the foal inside a rock, and then its mother galloped and kicked the
rock; the foal kicked from inside, and the rock split open into three pieces, and
the foal emerged. The hoof-prints of the mare and the foal are still there, and
the bla ma left the imprint of his penis.
bKra shis rgyal mtshan had a further encounter with the same goblin, Kye
rang skrag med, who appeared with his wife a few days later in the form of a pair
of poisonous snakes. He defeated them and made them swear oaths that they would
become protectors of the doctrine, Then, according to the Ya ngal gdung rabs:
He put two small needles into the earth to decide whether or not he should
found a village. He put an inverted basket over them, and when he looked after
seven days the basket was full and had been raised so that it did not touch the
ground,
What had filled the basket was, in fact, a young walnut tree which had sprouted
from the needles. This gigantic tree still stands above the entrance to the village
of Klu brag, and small pieces of wood are occasionally taken from it to make
receptacles for sacred relics. bkra shis rgyal mtshan, who is also sometimes known
as Yang ston Bla ma, died at the age of eighty-five. The descendants of bkra shis
rgyal mtshan later went to Dolpo, where they founded bSam gling Monastery
(No.223) and other religious centres. The Ya ngal clan still lives in several places
in Dolpo, and the association between the clan and this district has often led to the
mistaken assumption that Yang ston Bla ma originally came from here.
The land on which the village of Klu brag was built belonged to thini,
675



also known as gSum dGa'rab rdzong, which at that time was the most powerful
settlement in the region. Historical documents, known as bemcha, from Panchgaon,
confirm that surrounding villages were obliged to pay relatively heavy taxes to
Thini. Thus Pha lag and Dang dga' rdzong had to pay Thini nine large baskets of
meat annually, while nearby Sangdak provided eight male goats in their second
year. Ge lung had to make an annual payment of one adult bull yak and one yak
calf. Marpha had to pay its taxes in the form of unpaid labour. Every year, ten young
men would come from Marpha to Thini, bringing their own farming implements
and animals, to plough Thini's fields, and ten young women would come to do the
weeding. Even Manang had to pay annual tribute to its powerful neighbour. One
document from Thini gives the following account of events:
Yang ston Bla ma of Dolpo asked the headmen and constables of gSum dGa'
rab rdzong to give him the land of Klu brag. Because they considered him to
be the greatest bla ma, without any equals, they presented it to him. They said:
"even if you keep livestock, you may still have the land, even if a conflict
arises, you may still have the land. Take good care of Ya po ri and Ti mi ri
thang ka... Every year you should pay us 3 zowa of bumbali berries from Thini'
s hillside, three bundles of birch-bark, and a small basket of dzimbu".
The reason why Klu brag had to pay these commodities in particular may have
been simply that they were most abundant in the vicinity of the village - as indeed
they seem to be today, Klu brag is the only village in Baragaon which has extensive
forests, a legacy of the gift of land which was made to Yang ston Bla ma in the
thirteenth century. What is clear is that this tribute, compared with the burdensome
taxes paid by other settlements, was nothing more than a gesture of respect in
acknowledgement of da'rab rdzong's political authority.
3. 3. The legend of Gon phug dgon pa
One of bkra shis rgyal mtshan's first acts after establishing a Bonpo community
in Klu brag was to undertake a lengthy retreat of nine years, nine months and nine
days in a small cave situated some twenty minutes' walk above the valley floor.
It is said that, as a miraculous sign of his spiritual achievements, a ridge appeared
in the rock wall above the cave to mark each year that he spent in retreat. At some
period after the end of his retreat a small temple was built over the site, and this
construction was duly named Gon phug dgon pa, the Temple of the Meditation
Cave. There were a number of cells adjoining the main temple where hermits once
used to reside, but these fell into disrepair long before the recent collapse of the
main hall.
4. Hierarchical system
Although the village of Klu brag as a whole is regarded in Baragaon as a



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
religious settlement, only a small number of its inhabitants actively practise as bla
mas. Every male head of a household must be a priest, whether he attains to this
position by birth, adoption or marriage, and must undergo an initiation ceremony.
Younger sons who are not the heads of households may also undergo initiation and
receive an education if they choose, although priesthood is not obligatory in their
case. A small number of women are celibate nuns (jo mo); their religious role is not
a hereditary one.
4.1. The bla ma
The most important position in the hierarchy is that of bla ma. The bla ma may
be either a member of the community itself or a prominent religious figure from the
outside. The present incumbent is g Yung drung rgyal mtshan, a member of the Zhu
clan. Born in 1957 of Tibetan parents just on the Indian side of the western Tibetan
border, g Yung drung rgyal mtshan was subsequently recognised as the incarnation of
bsTan pa rgyal mtshan, who had been the founder of the little private Bonpo temple
in nearby Jomsom (Mustang dialect Dzongsam <Tib rDzong gsar). gYung drung
rgyal mtshan, the “Dzongsam sprul sku", was educated to the level of dge bshes in
sMan ri Monastery (No.231) in Dolanji, and after completing his studies came to
settle in Klu brag in the early 1990s. He recently married a Klu brag woman and is
living in Gom phug dgon pa (see below).
4. 2. The dbu mdzad
Far from being considered a prestigious office, the position of dbu mdzad
(precentor) is the most unpopular in the village. The incumbent is not decided on
a rotational basis but is appointed at a village meeting held specifically for this
purpose. The length of the term of office is on of the most variable, and although it is
likely to be fixed at its present time of two years, terms of one and three years have
been known in the past. The main reason for the unpopularity of the office is that the
dbu mdzad may not go to India for trading during the winter, since his duties require
him to be present in the village at least once a month.
The dbu mdzad's work consists in leading the chanting during ceremonies
and, whatever his age (the criterion which determines the order of seating in
non-religious gatherings) he sits at the head of the row of bla mas. He must make
the gtor ma for all ceremonies in the temple with the aid of other village bla mas
who are skilled at this, and during ceremonies lasting more than one day, he and the
chos khrims pa (see below) must sleep inside the temple to guard the butter and flour
sculptures from cats and rodents.
4. 3. The chos khrims pa
The chos khrims pa (proctor), who need not be literate, is chosen by ap-
677



pointment at the same time as the dbu mdzad. While the term of office is the same,
the chos khrims pa is not obliged to forego the winter trading. Like many other
aspects of monasticism, the duty of the proctor in Klu brag has been adapted to a lay
environment, and its scope has been extended to include non-monastic functions. In
spite of appearances the office is not merely a ceremonial vestige of earlier times,
but it is apparently regarded as a valuable peacekeeping force. Evidence for this lies
in the fact that at two of the annual secular festivals, an assistant chos khrims pa is
appointed for the duration of the festivities.
4. 4. The jo mo bla ma
In theory, the duty of the jo mo bla ma (the "nuns priest") is to lead and
supervise the nuns' ceremonies, whereas in actual fact is is only they who perform
the chanting while the few nuns that there are now look on or administer and beer.
There are two jo mo bla ma, of whom at least one must be literate. Whereas the
term of office used to be three years, it has recently been reduced to two, and the
incumbents are selected by casting dice amongst the adult male bla mas. In addition
to the main annual ceremony of the nuns (see below), there is one that is conducted
on the night of the tenth day in every month, and it is accordingly referred to as
Tshes bcu mchod pa (tenth-day ceremony).
In all the nuns' ceremonies, including the tshes bcu, making the gtor ma and the
tshogs (consecrated food for subsequent distribution to all the villagers) is the duty
of the younger jo mo bla ma, but he is usually helped by his senior. They are not
obliged to forego the winter trading as is the dbu mdzad, but may be absent on the
condition that they arrange for another bla ma to take their places.
Outgoing jo mo bla ma end their term of office after the annual ceremony, but
their successors are decided before the ceremony.
4.5. The mchod dpon
There are two mchod dpon, selected by appointment at a village meeting, and
the only occasion for which they are required is the mdos rgyab, the five-day-long
ritual which marks the end of the old year. Their term of office runs for only one
year. They lead and perform most of the dancing ('cham, for which reason they are
also sometimes referred to as "cham dpon), and on the organisational side they are
responsible for receiving and measuring the required contributions of oil from each
household, apportioning some of it to the women charged with making tshogs, and
for making and lighting the oil lamps.
4.6. The spyi pa
There are two spyl pa for each of the twenty-odd ceremonies held annually in
the temple, and the officiants are selected on a rotating basis. However, the rota does
678



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
not operate from one ceremony to another, but only from one year to the next in
such a way that each ceremony has its own roster of spyi pa.
The position in each case rotates by estate (grong pa), and it is to a household
rather than to an individual that the actual work is allocated, since the wives of
the two spyi pa are responsible for collecting the grain contributions from each
household and using it to brew the beer necessary for the ceremony.
4.7. The sku tshab
Like the spyi pa, the sku ishab is an office that has its origin in the great
monasteries of Tibet. It, too, has become a humble one in Klu brag to the extent
that a common synonym for it is chang ma, the "beer-dispenser". Only the more
important annual ceremonies have a sku tshab. He is also selected by household
rotation, and his duties are to assist the two spyi pa in the kitchen and in serving beer
and food to the bla mas.
5. Number of monks / priests
There are at present no celibate monks in Klu brag, although a few boys from
Klu brag, having taken monastic vows and received training in sMan ri Monastery
(No.231) in Dolanji, are living in India. An exception may be made for gTsug phud
rgyal mtshan, the senior bla ma of Bar sle in Dolpo, who lived in Klu brag for the
last few years of his life, departing a short while before his death in 2001. However
although he was a monk, he was living in Gom phug dgon pa, rarely descended to
the village itself, and played little part in the life of the community.
The other outsider" is the Dzongsam sprul sku, gYung drung rgyal mtshan (see
above). However, he is more integrated into the community to the extent that he has
married into it and presides at rituals.
There are ten-and-a-half estates (grong pa) in Klu brag, and these are
subdivided into fourteen households (khang pa). The head of each of the fourteen
households is considered to be a bla ma (grwa pa, though none is celibate). All
must participate in the calendrical ceremonies of the community, but only those
who are literate (about half the number) actually take part in reading the liturgy and
performing ritual procedures. In addition to the heads of household, some younger
men in the community have received some level of education either within the
village or in Dolanji and may therefore participate actively as bla mas.
6. The present educational system
The religious education of the Klu brag bla mas is carried on along much the
same lines as in the past: training may be received either from a local or visiting bla
ma residing in the village itself, or at a distant religious institution (Tibet in the past,
but now Nepal or India). About ten boys are currently undergoing monastic training
679



or pre-monastic schooling at sMan ri Monastery (No.231) in Dolanji. Certain rituals
are taught by fathers to their sons within the village, and this training is accompanied
by periods of retreat either in a cave or in the family chapel.
The Dzongsam sprul sku, gYung drung rgyal mtshan, is also providing an
education to villagers. His main focus of attention has been the village women, who
are illiterate but at whose request he has taught them certain devotional songs and
recitations.
Secular education, following the Nepalese state curriculum, is provided in
the village school, but the community has built a hostel that will provide parallel
education in Bon religious matters and Tibetan literacy.
7. Personnel and educational exchange of monks between monasteries
Apart from the late Bar sle Rinpoche and the Dzong sam sprul sku, the first a
native of Dolpo and the second of India, all the bla mas of Klu brag are native either
to Klu brag or to the neighbouring villages. Since there are no Bonpo establishments
of any size in Mustang district apart from Klu brag, the only education or devotional
visits that Klu brag pas usually make are to Dolanji or to Triten Norbutse Monastery
(No.230) in Kathmandu.
8. Description of daily rituals of the monastery
Other than the daily morning fumigation (bsang) ceremony and the lighting
of the votive lamp (mchod me) in the evening, there are no daily rituals. Every
household performs these same ceremonies in its private chapel.
9. Description of annual rituals of the monastery
The following ceremonies are listed in the register of temple ceremonies (ma
yig), which details the financial obligations of each household in subsiding each
performance.
Name of ceremony
Short title of main text
Tibetan date
month (tshes)
10
15
122
111
So sbyong/ Myung gnas
Bla ma mchod pa
Skye sgo gcod pa
Dran pa yab sras
Klong rgyas
Dran pa yab sras
"Khor ba ngan song skye sgo
good pa...
sTag la me 'bar spu gri dmar
po...
15
dGe rtsa mchod pa
680



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
115
15 Grub dbang rin po che'i 'das dMar thrid dug Inga rang grol
mchod (commemoration of Ka ru
Grub dbang bsTan "dzin rin chen
24 (Bla ma mchod pa che ba)
Mar khrid dug Inga rang grol
10 (Tshes bcu chen mo)
Rig 'dzin bon skor
Pyi pa spo lab (changeover of Rig 'dzin bon skor
temple stewards)
10 Bla sgrub mchod pa
Bla ma rtsa sgrub
(from dMar khrid cycle)
Zhi ba stag la
18 Bla ma mchod pa)
d Mar khrid dug Inga rang grol
30 dByar ston mchod pa
Rig 'dzin hon skor
Dasa'i mchod pa (anti-Dasain dMar khrid dug Inga rang grol
ceremony)
| 15 Ba shog mchod pate
R igdzin bon skor
15 Klong rgyas mchod pa
k long rgvas
15 bs Tan 'dzin nyi ma'i 'das mchod dMar Khrid dug Inga rang grol
15-19 mDos rgyab
Zhi khro
15
8
12
There are certain ceremonies that are not listed in the register. These include the
following two:
Short title of main text
Tibetan date Name of ceremony
month (ishes)
10 (Jo mo mchod pa)
mNyam med 'das mchod
(commemoration of the death
of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal
mtshan)
dMar Khrid dug Inga rang rol
Klong rgyas
The Jo mo mchod pa is held simultaneously with the first village ceremony of
the year. The latter is conducted in a private house while the nuns and their two bla
mas (who hold this position by rotation) assemble in the village temple. Since the Jo
mo mchod pa lasts only one day, the temple is vacated in time for the preparations
for the gso sbyong, which begins on the 13th.
The last ceremony was established comparatively recently. It is not listed in
the who lives in the small village of Drumbag, near Jomsom. The venue for the
ceremony alternates annually between the patron's home and the Klu brag temple.
10. Daily life of an individual monk
Except on the occasion of village ceremonies, the daily round of the village
priests consists mainly in pursuing economic activities.



11. Books and manuscripts kept by the monastery
Klu brag was one of the main sources of Bonpo religious manuscripts that were
reprinted in India during the 1960s and 1970s. There are many liturgical and a few
biographical works kept either in the temple library or in private houses. Various
other Bonpo works, published in India from other sources, have also been brought to
the village.
12. Economic circumstances of temple
The annual ceremonies performed in the village temple are financed by
the priestly estates (grong pa) on the basis of capital that was invested in these
rituals by patrons from Klu brag itself and from surrounding settlements. These
investments and the interest that must be paid by each of the estates are recorded in
a register of temple contributions referred to as the ma vig, the record of capital",
The documents in question are in the form of sheets of coarse paper measuring 9.5
inches by 8.5 inches sewn together along the centre and folded horizontally to make
a booklet. The two booklets are not, however, the original documents, but were
copied from an earlier scroll by an educated bla ma from Mustang who lived in Klu
brag for a short time at the request of the villagers. Households listed in the text
are identified by the heads of each, and the names in the register refer to men who
occupied this position in the last generation. The copies are therefore compratively
recent, and the fact that they have been updated unfortunately makes it impossible
to draw many inferences about the village as it would have been during the time of
the document's original composition. The type of patronage revealed by the register
is not based on a private relationship between a bla ma and a lay householder, but
embraces any number of people who wish to confer their patronage on the Klu brag
temple and its community of bla mas. This system itself has two sightly varying
forms. The first of these is apparently an earlier method and operates as follows.
If someone from a neighbouring village loses a close relative, he or she may
wish to bestow a certain amount of money on a religious institution in order that
prayers be said and lamps lit to generate merit for the deceased. Such donations
are known as sbyar mchog and are collected until the total is sufficient for the
establishment of a ritual. Originally the money used to be divided up into eight equal
portions and each portion given to one of the grong pa. This sum was used by that
grong pa as capital (a ma) with which to trade, and interest to the value of ten per
cent of the capital was contributed towards purchasing the foodstuffs necessary for
the ceremony. Sometimes the sum given to each householder was not the same, and
the form in which the interest was to be paid frequently differed, but these variations
are all recorded in the register and must still be paid as they are entered. The names
and perhaps the motives (usually the death of the named relative) were probably
recorded in the original register, but the more recent booklets contain only details
682



Bongo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
of the original contributions required of each household, and make provision for the
new ninth grong pa. Rituals that are financed by this method are referred to as the
'old ceremonies (mchod pa rnving pa), and these are contained in the first of the
two ma yig booklets.
Whereas the recipients of the patronage used to be the grong pa, the money
is now distributed among the 'monks' (grwa pa) and nuns (jo mo). 'Monks' in
this case still refers to village bla mas and the money continues to be invested
in household trade, but a household with two bla mas (for example, an extended
household occupied by a father and his eldest son) or with a resident nun will be
given a proportionately larger share of the capital. The system may be represented
by a simple diagram. Let us suppose that at a certain point in time there are five
priests or nuns in Klu brag's religious community (in fact there are now fifteen),
each represented in order of age by a letter. To simplify matters, it may be assumed
that the sum of money collected as sbyar mchog is fifty rupees, and each person
is consequently required to pay commodities to the value of one rupee per year as
interest. The amount payable is represented by a number following each letter:
Al
B1
CI
DI
EI
When a monk or a nun dies his or her payment of the interest ceases. But the
terms of receiving shyar mchog from patrons are that the ritual be perpetuated
on as grand a scale as the capital permits, and the onus of the deceased's temple
contributions is transferred to the two youngest members of the community. The
capital that has been allotted to the deceased is given in equal portions to the two
youngest, but in view of the depreciation of money the sum comes to a good deal
less even than the interest which they are required to pay in the form of foodstuffs
The bracketed letter represents the deceased.
(AI)
B1
ci
D112
11/2
If a new bla ma or nun, F, joins the community he or she then receives the
obligations of the deceased priest which had been allotted to the two who until now
had been the youngest. Everyone is again paying the same amount of interest:
B1C1D1ELFI
If another young bla ma then joins he receives half the interest-obligations of
each of the two oldest:
B12 C12 D1/2 E2
FIGI HI
683



If the oldest then died, not the youngest member but the youngest member
paying half a share would receive the obligations:
(B)
C12
D12
E1
F1
G1 Hilde
Finally, to conclude the possibilities, the premature death of a young bla ma or
nun would affect the two who are paying half a share each:
ci D
ELF1
(G)
HI
In this way no one pays less than half a share or more than one and a half.
It is not clear why this system was introduced in preference to the older one
which was based on estates (grong pa). It may be that grong pa were fragmenting
into separate households at that time, and since each house must have a resident bla
ma, this was regarded as a fairer system. The theory would be that the combined
wealth of the two households forming a split grong pa would be greater than that if
the grong pa was still a unit. However, this is not necessarily the case, and it does
not explain why nuns and junior bla mas in a house should have to pay, since they
do not necessarily strengthen the economic situation of that house. The rituals that
are financed by this method are known as the new ceremonies' (mchod pa gsar pa).
13. Number of local villages or nomads
Klu brag belongs to an enclave popularly known as Baragaon, a Nepali name
derived from a Tibetan original (Yul kha bcu gnyis) meaning "the twelve villages".
The original range of this enclave is not known, but in recent centuries it comprised
nineteen villages. The enclave was ruled by a duke (dpon po) who belonged to
one of the noble lineages from Lo, several days' walk to the north. Klu brag is the
southernmost village in Baragaon.
14. Economic occupation of the local population
The people are basically sedentary farmers who grow barley, wheat and
buckwheat, and rear livestock. This economy is supplemented by winter trading in
India and summer trading in Tibet, but long distance trade (mainly in contraband) to
Hong Kong and Thailand was also practised in the past two decades.
Notes
1 The historical texts from which it has been possible to confirm the dates of these early
historical events are discussed in two works: David Jackson's "Notes on the history of
Serib and nearby places in the Upper Kali Gandaki". Kailash, vol. 6, 1978, pp. 195-224;
and David Snellgrove's The Nine Ways of Bon, 1967, pp. 4-5.
684



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
MUSTANG DISTRICT AND
TIIE MUKTINATII VALLEY
Based on Kostka 1993: 84
TIBET
lentong
DOLP
Sat
(sagt Teele
T'shu
.
BARAGAON VTye
. Kg
Dreng
L'ANCUGAON
sont
Jualan
Marktinath
- That MANANG
The
Alpha
Tukche.
daki
120
Ka
. 11/
Khyena
le
13.
hepher
Muktinath
1/624,000
685



(219) Klu brag Monastery, Plate 1 dGon phug dgon pa, immediately after its restoration in 1997
(Photo C. Ramble 1997)
(219) Klu brag Monastery, Plate 2 don phug dgon pa, immediately after its restoration in 1997
(Photo C. Ramble 1997)
686



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
(219) Klu brag. Plate 3 The interior of Klu brag's Phun tshogs gling Temple during the annual mDos rgyab
festival, showing the glor ma of Zhi ba and Khro bo on the altar
(Photo C. Ramble 1997)
(219) Klu brag. Plate 4 The senior bla ma and two sa 'olul dancers during the annual mDos rgyab festival of
Klu brag
(Photo C. Ramble 1997)
687



(219) Klu brag, Plate 5 Villagers performing a 9-yang rdzas ceremony at the annual mDos rgyab festival of
Klu brag
(Photo C. Ramble 1997)
(219) Klu brag. Plate 6 Dancers at the mDos rgyab festival of Klu brag representing the four Bon skyong
and the village yulsa, Kye rang skrag med
(Photo C. Ramble 1997)
688



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
689
(219) Klu brag, Plate 7 A pair of tsakli from Dolpo (17th century?) showing
Yang ston Shes rab rgyal mtshan (right) and his teacher, Rong Tog
med zhig po
(Photo C. Ramble 1997)
(219) Klu brag. Plate 8 A sbyin sreg ceremony being performed in the
Village of Klu brag
(Photo C. Ramble 1997)



(219) Klu brag. Plate 9 Completing the contruction of the zlog bcas during the m
rgyab ceremony of Klu brag
(Photo C. Ramble 1997)
os
690



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
Dolpo (Nep. Dolpa) District
(220) gYung drung shug tshal gling Monastery
1. Name
The village dgon pa is called gYung drung shug tshal gling.
Twenty minutes' walk to the east is a hermitage called Brag dgon. The latter
is said originally to have been called Brag gung dgon pa. It is officially registered
under the Nepalicised name Takun.
2. Location
The village of Bar sle (Nep. Bajibara) is situated high above Tarakot on the
northern side of the Bheri river and on the western side of the Tarap river. gYung
drung shug tshal gling, the main village temple, is some twenty minutes' walk above
the village. Brag dgon hermitage is a further half-hour walk to the cast in a steep
exposed corner above the valley.
3. History
3. 1. gYung drung shug tshal gling
There used previously to be two other temples: one further up and one to the
west, but these are now both in ruins.
The main temple, above the village and next to the house of Bla chung lhag
pa is called gSer thang. It is said to be around 500 years old, but no documentary
evidence could be produced. It was renovated by a householder priest, the father of
g Tsug phud rgyal mtshan, and repainted recently by a local thangka-painter called
Zla ba.
Bla chung Ihag pa is the main bla ma of the dgon pa. The late gTsug phud rgyal
mtshan was his paternal uncle. He is a married bla ma, and his eldest son will be his
successor. There are eleven family members in the household, and their livestock
includes yaks, cows and horses. Due to the early death of his father, Bla chung lhag
pa's education was not completed.
3. 2. Brag dgon hermitage
This hermitage was built by gTsug phud rgyal mtshan. He helped his father
with the rebuilding of g Yung drung shug tshal gling, but did not want to follow in
his footsteps as a householder priest. He went to bSam gling (No.223) and remained
there for three years. After that he stayed for two years in the area of Ri bo dpal
'bar mountain, meditating in a hermitage. After returning to the village he wanted
to build a dgon pa and began to search for a place. He found a steep, rocky place,
where there was a stone with a painting of ston pa gShen rab, and some rocks that
691



resembled a stupa. He believed that this was a sacred place, connected with Me
Iha or Phyag gi dbang po, whose handprint is to be seen on one of the first rocks
encountered on the circuit around Mt. Ri bo dPal dbar.
Encouraged by all these auspicious signs, he started to build the first part of
Brag dgon temple while living in a cave on the mountain. About this time he was
joined by a nun, who was then 21 years old. The first chapel was completed in 1962,
and other sections were added subsequently.
4. Hierarchical system of gYung drung shugtshal gling and Brag dgon
At first there were two ordained monks, but this lineage ended and has been
followed by householder priests (sngags pa). gTsug phud rgyal mtshan was an
exception, since he had taken monastic vows. Bla chung lhag pa, his brother's son,
is a householder priest who maintains gYung drung shug tshal gling.
The lineage of gTsug phud rgyal mtshan and Bla chung Ihag pa is called dMu
tsha.
5. Number of monks/priests
5.1. gYung drung shug tshal gling
Bla chung lhag pa is the main householder bla ma. An old man is taking care
of the prayer-wheel house. His son is currently undergoing training in Man ri
Monastery (No.231) in Dolanji. There are no children receiving religious education
here at the moment.
In Bar sle there are altogether eleven householder priests.
5.2. Brag dgon hermitage
Only g Tsug phud rgyal mtshan and the nun were in residence when the present
fieldwork was carried out in 1998. There were no children being educated.
6. The present educational system
From time to time g Tsug phud rgyal mtshan used to teach Tibetan language to
boys.
7. Personnel and educational exchange of monks between monasteries
7. 1. gYung drung shug tshal gling
The son is presently being educated in Dolanji.
7.2. Brag dgon hermitage
gTsug phud rgyal mtshan himself travelled a great deal in his youth. He lived in
bSam gling for three years and later received initiations from Slob dpon bs Tan 'dzin
rnam dag in Kathmandu and from Sangs rgyas bstan'dzin in Dolanji. He moved to
692



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
Klu brag in the latter years of his life to take up residence in the restored don phug
dgon pa.
8. Description of daily rituals of the monastery
See no. 10 below
9. Description of annual rituals of the monastery
Name of ceremony
Tibetan
calendar
(tshes/ zla)
Lo gsar
3/1
mNyam med dus chen (birthday of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal 4-5/ 1
mtshan
Bla ma mchod pa (established here by Tsug phud rgyal mtshan) 2nd month
sTag la'i zlog pa
3rd month
sByin sreg (herbs and grains placed in a bowl and set on the mountain 4th month
for the protection of the village)
rNam rgyal stong mchod; this ceremony, which was performed until 7th month
recently in Bar sle, has been discontinued
Circumambulation of nearby Ri bo dpal "bar
7th month
10. Daily life of an individual monk
10. 1. gYung drung shug tshal gling
Bla chung Ihag pa alone reads scriptures and makes offerings in the morning.
During the daytime he works in the fields and with the animals. In the evening he
again performs a ritual in the temple.
10. 2. Brag dgon
The daily practice of gTsug phud rgyal mtshan was as follows:
- Rise at 5 a.m., perform various acts of worship, especially propitiation of Srid
pa rgyal mo
- Perform fumigation ceremony (bsang)
- Make gtor mas, light butterlamps
- Two to three hours of meditation in the afternoon
- Reading scriptures, chanting mantras
- Dinner is made by his sister, the nun
- One hour of practice (more on special days) before bed
The nun-sister used to cook, help out, and follow her own ritual practice (she is
learning to read).
693



11. Books and manuscripts kept by the monastery
11. 1. gYung drung shug tshal gling
Complete set of mDo mang
Dri med gzi brjid
bka' 'gyur and brTen 'gyur
12. Economie circumstances of temples
12. 1. gYung drung shug tshal gling
They receive only occasional support from the village, mainly at the time of the
ceremonies performed in the course of the ritual calendar.
12. 2. Brag dgon
They are supported by their own families and by occasional donations.
13. Number of local villages or nomads
Bar sle (Bajibara) village is divided into seven parts. The villagers are of mixed
religion, some being Buddhist and some Bonpo. There are said to be no coflicts
between people on religious grounds, and they visit each other's temples and
pilgrimage sites.
14. Economic occupation of the local population
Mainly agriculture and animal husbandry.
694



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
(221) Dar rgyas phun tshogs gling Monastery
1. Name of monastery
1. 1. Dar rgyas phun tshogs gling
1. 2. sMer phu dgon
2. Location
2. 1. Fifteen minutes walk north of mDo, in the area of mDo ta srab called Srib
phyogs. It is situated on the right bank of the Doro river about half an hour walk
eastwards from mDo towards Tshar ka.
2. 2. Mer phu dgon pa, now only ruins, is situated southwest of mDo in a side
valley
3. History
The Bon community first settled around Mer phu, which was established by
Tre ston Tshe dbang tshul khrims. Later the community moved to Srib phyogs in
a valley to the east from mDo rta srab where g Yung drung rgyal mtshan and bSod
mnams rgyal mtshan established another temple.
Until about two years ago there were two householder bla mas at Srib phyogs,
but by 2000 both had died and the Bonpo community of Dolpo is now worried about
the future.
4. Hierarchical system
There is a bla ma, of the Ya ngal clan, called gTsug phud dbang grags. He is a
sngags pa. There is also a precentor (dbu mdzad), a permanent position that is held
by a brother of the main bla ma.
5. Number of monks/ priests
Seventeen or eighteen sngags pa, all from the mDo ta srab area. No celibate
monks.
6. The present educational system
The main teacher is the Bla ma gTsug phud dbang grags, who taught his son,
his grandson and several other boys from the community. Some of the sngags pa
teach their own sons.
7. Personnel and educational exchange of monks between monasteries
The grandson is now a monk in Triten Norbutse (No.230). He has been in
695



Kathmandu for two years, after doing a three-year preliminary retreat in the village.
There are no other monks from this dgon pa either in Dolanji or in Kathmandu.
8. Description of daily rituals of the monastery
The house of the senior bla ma is adjacent to the dgon pa. He, or other
members of his family, perform the daily ceremonies. In the morning there is the
offering of water (yon chab) and the fumigation (bsang), and in the evening the
lighting of the butterlamp (mchod me) and the invocation of the protectors (bka'
skyong)
9. Description of annual rituals of the monastery
End of Ist, beginning of 2nd month: Ma tri ceremony.
6th month: annual repainting of the dgon pa.
8th month: collection of grain donations and settling of annual accounts.
End of 10th and beginning of 11th month: Du tri su, a five-day ceremony.
End of 11th, beginning of 12th month: smyung gnas. Performed by the sngags
pa of the temple.
10. Daily life of an individual monk
As householder-priests they are mainly occupied with secular economic
activities.
11. Books and manuscripts kept by the monastery
Includes manuscripts of mDo gzer mig, Dri med gzi brjid, Yum etc.
12. Economic circumstances of temple
The dgon pa is private, belonging to the family of the bla ma, and is officially
registered as such. Support is provided by the Bonpo inhabitants of the settlement
(about half the households). They support the institution with annual offerings of
grain to each of the priests. There is no government support, and if any additional
works need to be done funds must be raised from the local community, with the
priests' families being the major donors.
13. Number of local villages or nomads
mDo is a mixed area with Bon and Buddhist followers according to houses.
There are 11 houses of Bonpo and 37 of Buddhists.
14. Economic occupation of the local population
Farming, animal husbandry and trade.
696



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
(222) Yang dgon Monastery
1. Name of monastery
1 Kog lang (ruin)
2 Dar rdzong [orthography?] phun tshogs gling (ruin)
3 Yang dgon mthong grol gling (mThong grol phun tshogs gling)
2. Location
Tshar ka, eastern Dolpo, towards Mustang,
3. History
The oldest one is called Kog lang, the second one is Dar dzong phun tshogs
gling and the third one is mThong sgrol phun tshogs gling. The first two are ruined,
Bla ma bkra shis bstan'dzin, who obtained his dge bshes degree in Man ri
Monastery (No.231) in Dolanji, built the third monastery a few years ago. Kog lang
is said to be about the same age as bSam gling. Dar dzong phun tshogs gling said to
have been founded around the middle of the nineteenth century.
4. Hierarchical system
The senior bla ma is bkra shis rgyal mtshan, a member of the Ya ngal lineage.
In addition, there is a precentor (dbu mdzad) who occupies this position for life.
5. Number of monks/ priests
There are twenty-two sngags pa apart from the bla ma. There are also sixteen
nuns of whom only two are literate.
6. The present educational system
Bla ma bkra shis rgyal mtshan is himself mainly occupied in teaching. At
present he has five pupils, boys ranging in age from eight to ten years. He himself
had eleven years of religious training from his father, Nyi ma tshe brtan and his
uncle Tshul khrims. After this he received twelve years of education in Dolanji.
7. Personnel and educational exchange of monks between monasteries
There are currently six boys from Tshar ka studying in Dolanji and four in
Triten Norbutse (No.230), Kathmandu. There are two monks of Tshar ka apart
from bra shis rgyal mtshan who have obtained the dge bshes degree and they are
presently living in Dolanji. One is named bs Tan 'dzin, and the other is the new dpon
slob of Dolanji.
697



8. Description of daily rituals of the monastery
Personal rituals of the dge bshes.
9. Description of annual rituals of the monastery
Mainly in summer drumchö [?] (rNam rgyal stong mchod) and drumchod [?] in
winter, showing mask dances. Ma tri.
12. Economic circumstances of temple
The ceremonies are apparently funded by the families of the sngags pa
themselves.
13. Number of local villages or nomads
The lay population of Tshar ka is fairly evenly divided between Buddhists and
Bonpos. There are twenty-six households of Bonpos and twenty-eight of Buddhists.
14. Economic occupation of the local population
Sedentary farming, livestock rearing and trade between India and Tibet.
(223) bSam gling Monastery
1. Name of monastery
There are two temples in bSam gling. The main one is called Gyal gshen
ya ngal gdan sa bSam gtan gling dgon, more popularly known as Yang ston dgon
pa. (Yang ston is a contraction of Ya ngal gyi ston pa, the teachers of the Ya ngal
clan").
2. Location
Close to Phijor village. (Phijor is the Nepalicised form of the local name that
is pronounced "bicher", and in Tibetan is spelt in a variety of ways, e.g. Bi cher, Bi
cer, Byi tsher etc.)
3. History
Part of the history of the temple is related in the Ya ngal gdung rabs (sce
below), Khyung po 'Chi med g-yung drung provided the following supplementary
information. The temple was built more than 900 years ago by Yang ston Gyal
mtshan rin chen. The latter had been staying near Mt. Kailash, where he had a
dream in which he received a visit from Dran pa nam mkha'. He was told to go to
Dolpo and to build a temple there. Shortly after this dream he left Tibet for Dolpo,
travelling through Saldang, Namdo and Bi cher. At that time the village of Bi cher
698



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
already existed and contained a prayer-hall, a prayer-wheel and several statues. Yang
ston Gyal mtshan rin chen searched in many places until he found Sam gling, and
the various auspicious dreams he had while staying there persuaded him that this
was the place in which he should build a monastery.
4. Hierarchical system
Male lineage inheritance system at the Khyung po temple.
5. Numbers of monks/ priests
At present there are four monks staying permanently at Sam gling temple. One
boy is currently undergoing his three-year preparatory training. The four monks are:
gYung drung dar rgyas (Nyasel [sp?) clan)
Shes rab bstan 'dzin (Yang ston)
Ha rgyab
Nyi ma rgyal mtshan (Khyung po)
In addition to these monks, there are seventeen householder-priests in the area.
Six monks are currently being trained in sMan ri Monastery (No.231) in Dolanji and
Triten Norbutse (No.230) in Kathmandu.
11. Books and manuscripts
Bum (Prajñāpāramitā) in sixteen volumes
Parts of bka' gyur and bs Tan 'gyur
Ten volumes of Bum Nyi ma dgu shar
Three volumes of Klu 'bum
I volume of mDo mang
3 volumes of brGyad stong
Various other ritual texts and documents
12. Economic circumstances of monastery
bSam gling temple owns a substantial amount of land and even cattle in Bi
cher. These are looked after by the villages, but profits from the yield go to the main
temple
13. Local villages or nomads
Bi cher
14. Economic occupation of local population
Agriculture, animal husbandry and trade with Tibet.
699



(224) m Tha' srung Monastery
1. Name of monastery or temple
dPal gshen bstan mtha' srung mtsho gling dgon pa.
The Temple complex is a cluster of nine buildings and three ruins. The cluster
as a whole is known by the abbreviated name of mTha'srung dgon pa. The big
community temple is called simply gTsug lag khang. The address is:
Phoksumdo (Phug gsum mdo), Ringmo (Ring mo) village, Dolpa District,
Karnali Zone, Nepal.
2. Location
The temple complex is about fifteen minutes' walk from the village on the east
bank of the lake. The village, usually called Ringmo, is also called Tshowa (mTsho
ba) and Phoksumdo (Phug gsum mdo).
3. History
The temple, called mTha' bzhi mtha' srung mtsho gling dgon, was built by
Tshe dbang Tshul khrims of the Tre clan, but later looked after by a certain Gyal
mtshan tshul khrims, a bla ma of the mTha' bzhi lineage (note that the name of this
clan is also sometimes rendered mThazhu). The name is said to be derived from
a temple with the same name that was located in Tibet, in similar environmental
surroundings. The year in which the temple was built is not known, but may be
obtained on the basis of an examination of the Tre ston lineage history (work on
which is now proceeding). The area is said to have been popular among hunters,
who would drive animals into this rocky corner, from which there is no escape. Tre
ston Tshe dbang tshul khrims chose this site in order to suppress hunting and to
promulgate the Bon religion.
Most recent bla mas in Ringmo, in chronological order, are:
mTha' bzhi gDul ba rig 'dzin
Tre ston bSod nams g-yung drung
mTha' bzhi Gyal ba gtsug phud
The biography of m Tha' bzhi gDul ba rig 'dzin used to be kept in Ringmo, but
it is now in Kathmandu.
Tre ston bSod nams g-yung drung used to have many disciples. He himself
went to Tibet and studied in mKhar sna dgon pa. Gyal ba gtsug phud was one of his
disciples. First the community dgon pa was built. This was followed by the mTha'
bzhi chapel, and the students later built several smaller chapels.
mTha' bzhi Gyal ba gtsug phud, although he was from a priestly lineage,
originally became a carpenter. After becoming ill, however, he meditated on Khyung
dmar for three years, in the course of which he acquired a great deal of spiritual
700



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
power. His meditation cave, located above the nearby settlement of Palam, contains
many hand-prints and wing-prints from the khyung. He lived at the temple about
fifty years ago with a bla ma called Togs Idan, who had come from Khams and
married a local woman. After their death the temple effectively fell into neglect for
about ten years.
After nearly a decade without a bla ma, the temple was headed by gYung drung
rgyal mtshan of the Khyung dkar clan. He was invited from his home in sPung
mo (see infra) by the villagers of Ringmo. He remained at the temple for about
thirteen years until bSam grub nyi ma completed his studies in Man ri at Dolanji
(No.231) and returned, as a dge bshes, in about 1991. At first he concentrated on
his own practice, but the boys needed an education, and he accordingly accepted
five permanent students to undertake the three-year preliminary training. They were
taught reading, writing, grammar, philosophy and dialectic debate. Four of them are
now at Triten Norbutse (No.230) in Kathmandu for the continuation of their studies,
while four new boys have begun the three-year preliminary training.
In 1996 a new community temple called the second) gTsug lag khang was
added. The construction was supported by the WWF (World Wide Fund for Nature),
which supports certain projects in the Phoksumdo National Park, with a donation of
Rs. 45,000.
4. Hierarchical system
The dgon pa used originally to operate a system of hereditary succession
with incumbents from the m Tha' bzhi and Tre ston lineages. This succession was
interrupted (see above) by a break of some ten years, but the villagers invited g Yung
drung rgyal mtshan and, later on, dGe bshes Shes rab nyi ma, both from Pung
mo. Nowadays, therefore, the temple is run by an elected abbot, while hereditary
householder-priests still live at their private chapels.
1. mkhan po (abbot). The position of the abbot is occupied by die bshes bSam
grub nyi ma and has only existed since about 1991. Like dGe bshes Shes rab
nyi ma in sPu mer, dGe bshes bSam grub nyi ma belongs to the family of
sGrub thob Rinpoche (Khyung po dkar po).
2. spyi dbu bla ma: the community head bla ma'. His task is to be part of all
the rituals concerning the whole village and to pray for rain or stop hail
and frost depending on the time of year. Performing this duty he is also
referred to as ser srung or sad srung. The position is traditionally occupied
by the mTha' bzhi bla ma lineage. But since there was no one sufficiently
experienced in m Tsho, an invitation was issued to g Yung drung rgyal mtshan
from sPung mo (he is over 80 years old). Originally a hereditary position,
it is nowadays increasingly replaced by experienced persons of different
lineages. In the case of village and family rituals the abbot and the dge slong,
701



all educated in India are called to perform the ceremonies together with the
local grwa pa.
3. dbu mdzad 1
4. dge rgan: the proctor, corresponding to the office more commonly known as
dge skos.
5. dge bshes / dge slong/ drang srong: m Tsho used to lack its own dge bshes,
and abbot and other dge bshes who perform rituals here are all originally
from sPung mo. However, two monks from mTha' srung mtsho gling dgon
pa who were educated in India, took drang srong vows and are now referred
to as dge slong. They are usually invited together with the abbot for larger
domestic ceremonies and are always involved in major rituals at the dgon
pa. Furthermore several young men from mTsho are currently receiving
an education in Kathmandu and India (Dolanji), and some are planning to
become monks and take their dge bshes degree.
6. grwa pa: sometimes also called Lo gsum pa or ser khyim pa (a term only
used in the larger monasteries): married householder priests, usually Lo gsum
ра.
7.jomo, married nuns; these have taken a few vows.
A generation ago the Lo gsum pa and grwa pa were usually sent to sPu mer
for education. Nowadays they receive education from dGe bshes bSam grub
nyi ma. Some are still sent to sPu mer, to bSam gling or to Kathmandu or
to India (Dolanji). With the new Tapriza School nearby several children
are educated there for the first five years, so that they are literate before the
undertake the three-retreat.
The hierarchy is no longer very clear. In the past it used to be based on
lineage, but with the arrival of the new abbot from Pung mo and the spyi
dbu bla ma from sPung mo the situation is apparently changing. During
the period when there was no bla ma at m Tha' srung mtsho gling dgon pa,
religious education waned and was mainly received by bla mas from sPung
mo.
5. Number of monks
Living at the dgon pa:
Abbot: de bshes bSam grub nyi ma (originally from Pung mo), studied in
Dolanji.
others: - 2 monks who have partly studied in Dolanji, both dge slong (drang
srong)
- 2 old householder priests, grwa pa
- boys in their Lo gsum education (number differs from year to year,
none in 2002)
702



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
in village: - 13-15 grwa pa
- 13-14 jo mo
6. The present educational system
Until 1999 there were four boys in their education for the Lo gsum retreat.
During the Lo gsum they undertake sngon 'gro and dngos gzhi practices and winter
retreats. They take further initiations from different bla mas and study prayer music,
mask dancing and mask making.
In addition three young boys from the village used to visit the dgon pa
periodically to learn basic Tibetan language, but they are now studying at Tapriza
School. Two elderly householder priests living in their own houses at the dgon pa
follow their daily practice and only join in when there are bigger rituals. The two
monks (dge slong) who were educated in Dolanji follow their own daily practice and
carry out the different domestic and monastic rituals together with the abbot.
7. Personnel and educational exchange of monks between monasteries
Educational exchange takes place mainly between Ringmo, sPung mo and su
mer, and sometimes also bSam gling (which is much father away in the north-west
of Dolpo). Nowdays Dolanji (Shimla) and Triten Norbutse (Kathmandu) are also
on the circuit. Additionally the bla mas of m Tsho are called to perform rituals or
provide Tibetan medicine in Khaliban, a village further south with many Bonpo, but
no monastery or bla ma (see below). Since 2001 they have been building their own
small dgon pa and are trying to convince a bla ma from Pung mo to stay there and
perform the necessary rituals.
8. Daily rituals of the monastery
The daily rituals of the monastery are the individual performances of
the various monks. The monastery itself has monthly rituals, and these are
complemented by community ceremonies.
9. Description of annual rituals
Name of ritual
Place
Date (Tibetan)
Lo gsar. This is actually sometimes celebrated in the winter villages 12 month
different settlement clusters to the south, where the or sPung mo
villagers live during the winter. Many go to sPung mo
for Lo gsar.
Yul lha ceremony, in which the entire village
yul lha shrine 20 month
participates
above village
Me mchod (fire ritual for the fertility of the crops) rotating houses 5th month
703



sMan sgrub. Begun in 1996, and will henceforth be m Tha' srung 6 month
performed every few years in rotation with other m Tsho gling
Bonpo villages, at the dgon pa. In the intervening
years they hold another dus chen on the 1st day of the
6th Tibetan month.
rNam rgyal stong mchod
m Tha' srung 6/7th month
m Tsho gling
Dus chen for rNam rgyal shes rab rgyal mtshan, the mTha' srung 7h month
builder of sPu mer monastery.
m Tsho gling
Pilgrimage to Khyungpur, Bla ma chu mig, Jagdul or pilgrimage 7 month
Shey
places
Bar tshogs mchod pa, a ceremony for the well-being m Tha' srung 8/9th month
of animals at the beginning of the frosts and for the mTsho gling
expiatiation of sin incurred during the mass sacrifice
of animals throughout the kingdom of Nepal during
the national Dasain festival,
Yul sa gsol (pho Tha and yul lha offerings)
Yul sa shrine & gr month
diff. houses
dBal mchod ritual for prosperity and health
rotating houses 10 month
Ma tri ceremony, for six days, at the temple
m Tha' srung 10 month
mTsho gling
Khyungpur pilgrimage
pilgrimage 11/12 month
place
Every month on the 10th day a Tshes bcu ritual is performed at the dgon pa and
financed according to a rotational system,
10. Daily life of an individual monk
10. 1. Daily practice of the boys undergoing the three-year preliminary retreat
- Wake up 3a.m.
- Pray to the yi dam
- prostrate in the main dgon pa 300 times before breakfast
- breakfast
- ritual practice of bsang, approximately half an hour
- again about 500-600 prostrations
- 10 a.m. dge bshes teaches the lo gsum pa
- lunch
- prostrate in main dgon pa 'shogs khang
- tea
- ritual practice of gongtong (<dgong stong (?), a local term for bka'skyong)
- grammar lesson, reading text
- dinner
- recite texts
- triple prostration
704



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
- sleep
10.2. Daily practice in Shes rab bstandzin dgon pa
- morning worship of yi dam (sTag la me 'bar)
- tea break
- fumigation; text used is bang gi dag gtsang sngon 'gro'i rim pa
- bka'skyong in evening
11. Books and manuscripts in m Tha'srung and mTsho gling monasteries!
written down by dGe bshes bSam 'grub Nyi ma
- sTon pa'i rnam thar
12 vol.
- 'Bring po gzer mig
3 vol.
- mDo 'dus
2 vol.
-rNam rgyal gzungs chen gser dngul bris ma
3 vol.
- Byams ma'i rgpud
2 vol.
- Zhang zhung snyan brgyud
1 vol.
- Akhrid nyams rgyud
2 vol.
- Ser 'od
7 vol.
- Tshe dbang gzhung bzhi
9 vol.
- s Tag Iha bris ma
- Kang 'bum
5 vol.
- Meri
3 vol.
- Ge khod
3 vol.
- sPyi 'dul
2 vol.
- Dran pa yang gsang
3 vol.
- Phur pa
3 vol.
- Kye sgo gcod pa 'i mdo
100 vol.
- dBal gsas
2 vol.
- Kye sgo gcod pa yig nag can
12 vol.
5 vol.
12. Economic circumstances
The dgon pa no longer owns fields in Ringmo village. Monks are maintained
by their individual families, while the main dgon pa is supported by the village,
although donations are received from private benefactors as far away as Bi cher and
Khanigaon. In 1996 Ringmo dgon pa received a donation of Rs. 45,000 from the
WWF for the construction of a new community temple (see above).
13. Number of local villages or nomads
Ringmo, also called Tshowa (m Tsho ba) or Phoksumdo (Phug gsum mdo) is
the main village. The population of Ringmo is grouped into 33 houses. In addition to
705



the villagers of Tsho the people from Rike (about 40 people) and Renji (about 25
people) villages are supporting the dgon pa and call the bla mas to perform rituals.
14. Economic occupation of the local population
The people of Ringmo subsist on agriculture (barley, buckwheat, potatoes,
mustard), animal husbandry (goats, yaks, dzos, a few chickens) and trade. In
summer they go to Tibet to exchange grain for salt, tea, wool and modern Chinese
manufactured products. In spring and autumn they travel southward to exchange tea,
salt and wool for grain and other goods. In the southern trade, barter with products
from the north is increasingly being replaced by cash transactions.
Since the opening of Shey Phoksumdo National Park a few men work as game
scouts for the park or WWF and receive salaries. Two men have passed the SLC
(School Leaving Certificate) and receive salaries as government teachers.
Notes
1 This list was compiled by de bshes bSam grub nyi ma.
(225) sPung mo and sPu mer Temples
1. Name of the monastery
1. 1. sPung mo
Nam rgyal lha khang, of the Tre ston Bru lineage
Other monasteries are in sPu mer, an hour's walk from Pung mo. Many
ceremonies are combined.
1. 2. sPu mer
a. Upper:
b. Middle:
c. Lower:
d. Lowest:
e.
gYung drung phyug mo
De chen gling
Padma gling, renamed Theg chen rab rgyas gling
Bla brang
Shug ri nyi shar ri khrod (four hours' walk from sPu mer)
2. Location
rNam rgyal lha khang is in the village of Pung mo, which is situated between
the Kagmara Pass and the Sumduwa Army Checkpost.
The settlement cluster of Pu mer, with its four temples, is situated in a side
valley leading from sPung mo to the grazing areas called Gunasa [dGun sa?] (one
hour's walk from sPung mo). Further up the valley towards Gunasa, after passing
the small cluster of houses in Punika, the hermitage of Shug ri nyi shar can be
706



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
reached (about four hours' walk from sPu mer). The cluster of sPu mer dgon pa,
measured at bDe chen gling, is located at 3,366 m., at N 29°09' 04.1" /E 82° 51'
51.5".
3. History of the monasteries in Pung mo and sPu mer
3. 1. sPung mo
The rNam rgyal lha khang belongs to the Tre ston Dru lineage. It was founded
by Tre ston Tshe dbang tshul khrims, who also installed a large statue of g Tso mchog
mkha 'gying there. There is an annual ceremony for the propitiation of the latter yi
dam. This is the community temple, and no one lives here.
3.2. sPu mer
The temples listed above were built in the following order: c, d, a and b.
a. gYung drung phyug mo
Previously there had been a small chapel built by Tre ston gTsug phud rgyal
mtshan. It was built by rNam rgyal Shes rab rgyal mtshan, who was the father of
Ge khod Rin chen rgyal mtshan (also known as Grub thob Rinpoche). Grub thob's
father came from Tibet and stayed some years in sPung mo, before coming here
to build the upper temple (a). Grub thob, who belonged to the Khyung po dkar
po (Khyung dkar) lineage, was the eldest of six children. He became a monk and
a renowned practitioner. He died at the age of 73 and remained in thugs dam for
five days. The three brothers now living in sPu mer, as well as the dGe bshes in
Phoksumdo, are all children of one of Grub thob's brothers.
b.bDe chen gling
This family house and chapel was built by Grub thob Rinpoche and his
father, but later than g Yung drung phyug mo. Nowadays it accommodates two
householder-priests and their families.
c. Padma gling or Theg chen rab rgyas gling
The second name was given by Slob dpon bsTan 'dzin mam dag to offset the
specifically Buddhist overtones of the first name. The dgon pa is a tantric temple.
d. Bla brang
Built by Tre ston Nam mkha'rgyal mtshan. After the latter's death, Tre ston
rTog rgyal stayed here and married. Because he had no sons, the Tre ston sgo lineage
was interrupted, and the temple is now falling into dereliction.
e. Shug ri nyi shar ri khrod
This hermitage has been used for meditation by several bla mas, especially of
the Tre ston lineage. Nowadays there are two boys staying here for their three-year
period of initial training.
707



4. Hierarchical system
1. spyi dbu bla ma, the "Community head bla ma". His task is to be part of
all the rituals concerning the whole village and to pray for rain or stop hail
and frost depending on the time of year. Nor bu bla ma from Pu mer (a
member of the Khyung po dkar po lineage, grandson of Grub thob Rinpoche
= Namgyal Sherab Gyaltshen of the Khyung po dkar po lineage) currently
holds this position. Incumbency is hereditary.
2. bla ma / rin po che (bla ma), In Pung mo this is the seat of former Grub
thob Rinpoche (rNam rgyal Shes rab rgyal mtshan of Khyung po dkar po
lineage), who was highly revered in Dolpo. Today it is dGe bshes Shes rab
nyi ma, his brother's grandson, who occupies this position. It is a hereditary
position, but it is additionally the position of the first dge bshes in sPung mo,
who returned from Dolanji and took up residence in sPu mer.
3. dbu mdzad: Normally the same person, who leads the ceremony (1 or 2
above), occupies this position.
4. dge rgan: the proctor or disciplinarian, the position usually referred to
elsewhere as dge bskos or chos khrims pa.
5. grwa pa: 13 grwa pa: married householder priests, usually lo gsum pa, or
some vows
6. jo mo: 13 jomo, married, they have taken a few vows
7. dge bshes / dge slong
Five men from sPung mo/sPu mer have accomplished their dge bshes degree in
Dolanji and have taken dge slong vows. Today only two stay in sPung mo, while the
others are working in different areas.
The dge bshes do not yet have special, clearly defined tasks except for keeping
up their own chapels. But they are often called simultaneously with the spyi dbu
bla ma for rituals and ceremonies in the village and are expected to undertake
their own retreats. The main bla ma, however, occupies a position somewhat close
to that of abbot. At the moment he is also working at the new Tibetan medical
clinic in Chunubar in rotation with other local grwa pa. Of the five dge bshes who
returned from India after finishing their dge bshes degree only one lives in sPung mo
(specifically, sPu mer).
It seems that the dge bshes obtain high positions only if they have inherited
them, and a high level of education is still not a sufficient criterion of status. The
status of the spyi dbu bla ma is therefore still higher than that of these dge bshes.
However, the traditional hierarchy is apparently changing, and often all are invited
for important ceremonies.
The monastery in sPung mo is maintained by a private household, and there
are no priests in residence. There are, however, several householder priests who are
educating their own sons. In su mer there are three brothers of the same lineage.
708



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
One of them, dGe bshes Shes rab nyi ma (living in gYung drung phyug mo) is the
abbot, and is responsible for the education of his nephews. In addition, he also
occasionally teaches other boys from sPung mo.
U
5. Number of monks
dge bshes/dge slong 5
Five men from sPung mo/sPu mer have accomplished their dge bshes degree
in Dolanji and have taken their dge slong vows. The eldest is de bshes Nyi ma
'od zer (of the Khyung po ser rtsa clan), who founded the monastery in Kag Hurikot
and is currently residing there. de bshes Sherab Nyima (Khyung po dkar po) is the
abbot of sPu mer dgon pa, dGe bshes; Nyi ma seng ge (Tre ston) resides in g Yung
drung kun grags gling dgon pa in Sikkim, dGe bshes bSam 'grub nyi ma (Khyung
po dkar po) is the abbot at mTha' srung mtsho gling dgon pa and dGe bshes g Yung
drung dbang rgyal (IDong menyag) teaches at Tapriza School in Sachog (between
sPung mo and mTsho yul). Furthermore there are several young men from sPung mo
in education in India (Dolanji), Benares and Kathmandu, some of them planning to
become monks and to take their dge bshes degrees.
- grwa pa 13
- jo mo 13
6. The present educational system
The grwa pa are either taught by their fathers or uncles or sent to sPu mer,
m Tha' srung mtsho gling dgon pa, Kathmandu or India for their religious education.
The education available in sPung mo/sPu mer mainly consists of the Lo gsum
(3 years, 3 month, 3 days) retreat to sPu mer dgon pa, Shug ri nyi shar hermitage,
mTsho dgon pa or Duli dgon pa (Khanigaon/Hurikot). It entails sngon 'gro and
dngos gzhi practices and winter retreats.
7. Personnel and educational exchange of monks between monasteries
Several boys from sPung mo were educated in Pu mer (especially during
the time of rNam rgyal shes rab rgyal mtshan and Ge khod in chen rgyal mtshan)
or have gone to the monasteries in m Tsho, bSam gling, Khanigaon/Hurikot,
Kathmandu or India for religious education. There is very frequent exchange
between mTsho village, sPung mo and sPu mer. Further exchanges take place with
Kag Hurikot and bSam gling. Lately several boys left for studies to Triten Norbutse
Bonpo monastery (No.230) in Kathmandu and sMan ri (No.231) in India. Close
contact also exists with Bar sle, Tsha lung and Khaliban villages in southern Dolpo.
Khaliban villagers in particular often invite the grwa pas or bla mas from sPung mo
to perform rituals because they do not have their own bla ma or monastery, but are
strongly connected to the Bonpo community. Since 2001 they have been building
709



their own small dgon pa and are trying to persuade a bla ma from sPung mo to stay
there and perform the necessary rituals.
8. Description of daily rituals of the monastery
There are no daily rituals at rNam rgyal lha khang, but only village functions,
The dge slong and grwa pa usually perform a bsang ceremony in the morning and a
bka'skyong in the evening.
INI
9. Description of annual rituals in Pung mo/sPu mer
Description of annual rituals at rNam rgyal lha khang in sPung mo (NL) or
Theg chen rab rgyas gling in sPu mer (TR), or elsewhere in sPung mo
Name of ritual
Place
Date Tibetan)
Lo gsar, New Year
Koiru, sPung mo 12m/1st month
winter village
s Ton pa dus chen
1 month
Yul sa gsol kha (pho tha and vul tha offerings)
Yulsa shrine 2 nd month
Bla ma mchod pa: Nam mkha'rgyal mishan dus chen TR
2nd month
Pyi ba la khro bo'i dkyil "khor zhal phye ba: ritual NL
30/4 month
of g Tso mchog mkha' 'gying commemorating Tre
ston Tshe dbang tshul khrims
Me mchod (fire ritual)
rotating houses 5th month
g Yang sgrub .
NL
6 month
rNam rgyal stong mchod
NL
16/7th month
Bla ma chu mig pilgrimage
Gungthang 7 month
Bla ma mchod pa: commemorating the death of TR and diff. guh month
Khyung po rNam rgyal shes rab rgyal mtshan
houses
Bar tshogs (to compensate for the sins incurred by NL
8/9th month
the national festival of Dasain)
Yul sa gsol kha (pho lha and yul lha offerings) Yul sa shrine & 9 month
diff. houses
dGu gtor
10 month
Ma tri duschen, several days
NL or TR? 11th month
Bla ma mchod pas commemorating the death of Ge NL and TR 11 month
khod Rin chen rgyal mtshan, who died about 12
years ago. He was the son of rNam rgyal shes rab
rgyal mtshan
TR
10. Daily life of an individual monk
The grwa pa and jo mo live at home with their family and only assemble for
ceremonies. The dge bshes stay in different places (Medical Clinic, sMan rtsis
khang, Tapriza School, etc.) They perform their daily practices in their personal
temples or at their new places of work. Sometimes the grwa pa receive teachings or
dbang from differing bla mas in the course of rituals.
710



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
no. of vols.
12
11. Books and manuscripts
11. 1. Texts at gYung drung phyug mo dgon pa in sPu mer!
Books for ceremonies:
Title
1. Dri med gzi brjid
2. Khro bo sgrub skor
3. Phur pa sgrub skor
4. Ge khod sgrub skod dbal chu i skor bcas pa
5. Khro bo gsang thus 'dur gvi skor sgrub skor
6. Me ribka'sgrub skor
7. Tag la'i sgrub skor
8. Khyung dmar sgrub skor
9. gDugs dkar po
10. Rig 'dzin 'dus pa sgrub skor
11. dBal gsas
12. Tshe sgrub bya ri ma
13. Du tri su
14. skye sgo
15. Rab gnas skor
16. Klong rgyas
17. sPyi 'dul
18. Ma mo rbod gtong pod
19. Me dpung dgu dril pod
20. Sang po ja (?)
(rGyud kyi skor)
21. Ma rgpud sangs rgyas rgvud gsum
22. Ma tri trgvud
23. mKha' 'gro gsang good kyi dmigs skor
24. Byams ma'i rgyud
25. dMar 'khrid dug Inga rang grol gvi drang don nges don
(rNam thar gyi skor)
26. Grub dbang batan 'dzin rin chen gyi mnam thar
27.rNam rgyal shes rab rgyal mtshan gvi rgvud rim shog dril
28. gZags kyi nyi ma'i rnam thar
29. Shar pa rnal 'byor gvi rnam thar
11. 2. Texts at bDe chen gling in sPu mer?
1. Shar pa rnal 'byor gyi rnam thar
2. mDo bskal bzang
3. Khro bo rgpud drug
711



2
4. mDo gzer mig
5. Do mang
6. Tre ston nam mkha'rgyal mtshan gyi rnam thar
7. Zhi khro sgrub skor
8. sTag la sgrub skor
9. Rig 'dzin bon skor sgrub skor
10. Khro bo sgrub skor
11. Du tri su
12. skye sgo gcod pa pod
13. dBal gsas sgrub skor
14. dBal gsas drag po dgu skor
15. gSang drag sgrub skor
16. Me ri bka'ma
17. Ma rgyud sgrub skor
18. g To nag
19. gSer 'od nor bu 'od 'bar
20. Klong rgyas sgrub skor
21. Tshe dbang drag po sgrub skor
22. dMar 'khrid dug Inga rang grol
23. Dam can las gsum
12. Economic circumstances of the monasteries
sPu mer dgon pa (a and b) are maintained by the family living there. In 2002
they received some money from the Phoksumdo National Park to pay for renovation
work in Phyug mo temple.
The gnyer pa and gnyer ma, a duty that changes every year in a rotating system,
collect the food and goods for communal ceremonies at Nam rgyal lha khang. They
have to collect the food, prepare chang, make rtsam pa, etc. The quantity of food
and other goods that each household has to provide depends on the size and number
of fields of each family and on the number of grwa pa and jo mo in a household.
13. Number of local villages or nomads
sPung mo is the main village in this area. The clusters of sPu mer and Punika
can be added. sPung mo has about 15 buildings housing some 120 to 130 people.
About 16 people live in sPu mer and about 20 people in Punika.
14. Occupation of the local population
The people of sPung mo, sPu mer and Punika subsist on agriculture (barley,
buckwheat, potatoes, mustard, beans), animal husbandry (goats, yaks, dzos, dzomos,
a few horses) and trade. In summer they go to Tibet to exchange grain for salt,
712



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
tea, wool and modern Chinese products and in spring and fall they go southward
to exchange tea, salt and wool for grain and other goods. In the trade to the south
money is more and more replacing the goods from the north. Since the opening
of Shey Phoksumdo National Park several men also found work as game-scouts
working for the park or for WWF and receive salary and clothing. One man has
passed the SLC (School Leaving Certificate) and receives a salary as a government
teacher.
Notes
1 List compiled by dGe bshes Shes rab nyi ma under the title dGon pa g-yung drung phyug
mo'i nang bzhugs dpe rnying,
2 List compiled by Lha bu and Nor bu bla ma under the title sPu mer bde chen gling du
bzhugs paidpe rying.
(226) gYung drung 'gro 'dul gling Monastery
1. Name of monastery
gYung drung 'gro 'dul gling dgon pa. Popularly referred to as Duli dgon pa.
address: Yungdrung Gompa, Khaigaon Hurikot, Dolpa District, Karnali Zone,
Nepal
Nyima Wozer Lama, Yungdrung Wangyal Lama
2. Location
The monastery is situated between the villages of Khanigaon and Hurikot, one
hour's walk from the first and half an hour's walk from the latter.
3. History of the monastery
Hurikot used to be a Bonpo community, but the religion fell into decline
after the death of the last bla ma. The villagers of Hurikot used to maintain close
links with bsam gling (No.223), but since even in bSam gling there was no bla
ma who could have supported the village they asked sPung mo. When Nyi ma 'od
zer (Nyima Wozer) finally finished his studies in India and received his dge bshes
degree, he came back and started to collect money to build a new mnastery near
Hurikot. The monastery was finally completed a few years ago. A community dgon
pa is now being planned, and Nyi ma 'od zer is currently raising funds for this.
Nowadays sPung mo has very close relations with Hurikot, and they support
each other whenever there is need. Because of the absence of a bla ma for a long
time the situation became quite difficult, and the religion became something of a mix
between Bon and local shamanic practices.
713



4. Hierarchical system
Nyi ma 'od zer is the abbot of the monastery. He was invited here by the
villagers of Hurikot.
5. Number of monks
Three boys from sPung mo and Ringmo are being educated at the monastery.
(227) Srid rgyal Monastery
1. Name
Srid rgyal dgon pa
2. Location
Above the village of Tsha lung, five hours from Dunai on the northern side of
the Bheri river, opposite Juphal, up a steep trail.
3. Founder of the dgon pa
Bla ma Tre ston Srid rgyal bzang po, a disciple of Tre ston Tshe dbang tshul
khrims.
3.1. Present bla ma
Shes rab phun tshogs, a sngags pa who is a rare visitor to Kathmandu. No old
texts are kept here.
4-7. Hierarchical System, Number of monks, education system, exchange
Lineage householder bla mas, from father to son.
8-13. Villages
The villages are Tsha lung and Kalikara
14. Occupation of the local population
Agriculture, animal husbandry.
714



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
(228) Dorpatan Monastery
1. Name of monastery
bKra shis dge rgyas mtha' brtan gling
2. Location
Dorpatan refugee camp, Rukum District, Dhaulagiri Zone
3. History
Shes rab blo gros, the old abbot of Man ri monastery in Tibet, was living for
a while with other members of the Bonpo community in Kathmandu, including
bsTan 'dzin mnam dag, shortly after coming into exile. The Red Cross began to build
a refugee camp in Dorpatan in the early sixties, and after the departure of bstan'
dzin mam dag to England, Shes rab blo gros went to Dorpatan. The Dorpatan temple
was created at this time. Shes rab blo gros later went to Manali in India, and the
management of the temple was taken over by Tshul khrims nyi ma, a bla ma from
Kre ba, north of Kyirong, in Tibet. Most of the members of the Dorpatan camp
were from Kre ba. After the murder of Tshul khrims nyi ma in a celebrated incident
in 1969/1970, the temple was run by mKhan po bSod nams rgyal mtshan, from
Khyung po. He died in 1995, and has been succeeded by de bshes bs Tan 'dzin dar
rgyas, a monk from Dolanji who was appointed to this position by the mKhan chen
Sangs rgyas bstan'dzin.
4. Hierarchical system
The monastery is small, and the hierarchical system not elaborate. There is a
mkhan po, an dbu mdzad and a gnyer pa, Tshul khrims rgyal mtshan.
5. Number of monks/ priests
Including the hierarchs listed above in no. 4, there are six monks, who live in
the monastic quarters attached to the temple.
6. The present educational system
Religious education is relatively unstructured; the dge bshes sporadically
teaches Tibetan to the children from the refugee camp.
In addition to the monastery there is a medical centre, where teaching is
provided by Gergan Tshul khrims sangs rgyas, who came from Khyung po, in
eastern Tibet, in the mid-1980s. He has about ten students, most of whom are from
the local refugee community but one from Dzar, in the Muktinath Valley of Mustang
District.
715



7. Personnel and educational exchange of monks between monasteries
There is a certain amount of mobility between Dorpatan, sMan ri Monastery
(No.231) in Dolanji and Triten Norbutse (No.230) in Kathmandu.
8. Description of daily rituals of the monastery
Essentially, fumigation (bsang) and water-offering yon chab) in the morning
and bka'skyong (invocation of the protectors), with the lighting of a mchod me
(votive lamp), in the evening.
9. Description of annual rituals of the monastery
The main annual rituals are: mNyam med dus chen (commemoration of
mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan) in the 1st month; smyung gnas in the 4th
month; dgu gtor of sTag la in the 9th month.
10. Daily life of an individual monk
The monks do not farm or engage in much commerce, but they are much in
demand for the performance of domestic rituals among the lay community.
11. Books and manuscripts kept by the monastery
The library consists almost entirely of Bonpo works reprinted in India,
12. Economie circumstances of temples
The monastery owns a number of fields, and receives an income from the lease
of this land to lay farmers from the refugee community. Further support is provided
by the lay population and also from Triten Norbutse (No.230) and the Bonpo
community in Kathmandu.
13. Number of local villages or nomads
Approximately 200 people.
14. Economic occupation of the local population
The people migrate seasonally between Dorpatan and the south (mainly
Pokhara), where they live for part of the time. In Dorpatan they grow mainly
potatoes, as well as oats for livestock. Apples are now being grown in increasing
quantities.
The potatoes are exchanged in the south for salt and rice, and this exchanged in
turn in the middle hills for maize and wheat.
716



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
(229) Mon ri zur gsum Temple
1. Name of temple
Mon ri zur gsum
2. Location
The village Kha legs 'bum (Nep. Khaliban) is situated across the river from
Tripurakot (Tibtu) in Pahada VDC below the mountain Monrisosum (Mon ri zur
gsum).
3. History of the Monastery
The Tibetan-speaking population of this area offer, as the etymology of the
name Khaliban, kha legs 'bum, "a hundred thousand sweet words", and argue that
the present form (Nepali for "empty forest") is a later transformation. The story
goes that the Tibetan settlers chose this lonely place for its good pastureland. Matri
stones in the area are pointed out as evidence of the antiquity of Bon practice in the
area. As contact between the Tibetans and the southern population grew closer, the
practice of Bon fell into abeyance. Rituals were customarily performed by Bonpo
priests from sPung mo, mTsho or Hurikot, but for some years there has been a
general wish to have a resident bla ma. In 2001 work began on the construction of a
monastery.
The name of the site, Mon ri zur gsum, is derived from that of a nearby
mountain, a pilgrimage place that is said to have been opened by Ha ra ci par.
A stupa standing amind some ruins near Khaliban is said to mark the site of the
original temple founded by Ha ra ci par. Other sacred relics include a footprint in
stone said to have been left by Ka ru Grub dbang bsTan 'dzin rin chen (nineteenth
century) while he was performing prostrations in front of the holy mountain
4-7. Hierarchical System, Number of monks, education system, exchange
At the moment there are no local bla mas in Khaliban. When there is need for a
ritual or ceremony, the bla mas from Pung mo, m'Tsho and Hurikot are called. The
main reason why the local villagers wish to build a temple is precisely so that they
might have their own resident bla ma.
8/9. Rituals
They celebrate Lo gsar and some smaller rituals for personal purposes in the
private houses
For example Tongchod, Takchod, Magyud.
717



10. Daily life of an individual monk
Not applicable
11. Books and manuscripts which the monastery keeps
No old books in the village.
12. Economic statisties in the monastery
The people of Khaliban and several bla mas from Phoksumdo are currently
trying to raise money for the construction of a small monastery. So far, they have
received support from WWF, Tapriza Verein and the NGO called Friends of Dolpo.
13. Number of local villages or nomads
Khaliban (about 21 houses).
14. Occupation of the local population
Agriculture, provision of ponies for transport, animal husbandry (cow, ox,
sheep, goats), trade.
718



Bondo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
Bon Monasteries in Dolpo
1. (220) gYung drung shug tshal gling Monastery
2. (221) Dar rgyas phun tshogs gling Monastery
3. (-) Srib phyogs Monastery
4. (222) Da dzung phun shogs gling
(222) Yang dgon Monastery
5. (223) bSam gling Monastery
6. (224) mTha' srung mtsho gling Monastery
7. (225) sPung mo Temple
8. (225) sPu mer Temple
9. (-) Jags 'dul Monastery
10. (226) gYung drung 'gro 'dul gling Monastery
11. (227) Srid rgyal Monastery
Seard
BANTSHANG
Shey Gempa
NANG-KONG
PHOKSUDO
Far
k
an
Pungmosho Ringmo)
Red
Pien
• R
Ruma Rass
Range
Roha
JAJARKOT
MUSTANG
DUNA
URONG
Mukulan
Bon Monastery
• Bon Village
• Village/Settlement
A Mountain
+ Airport
Lake, River
Mountain Pass
National Boundary
District Boundary
Trails
Traderoutes Tsha/Pugmo
RUKUM
Potench
per Sand
-
Churnal
MYAGD
719



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
(220) gYung drung shug tshal gling Monastery, Plate 1
(Photo M. Kind 1992)
(220) gYung drung shug tshal gling Monastery, Plate 2 Brag dgon Hermitage
(Photo M. Kind 1992)
721



(220) Yung drung shug tshal gling Monastery, Plate 3 Bar sle Rinpoche
(Photo M. Kind 1992)



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
(221) Dar rgyas phun Ishogs gling Monastery. Plate 1
(Photo Samdrup 2002)
(221) Dar rgyas phun tshogs gling Monastery, Plate 2
(Photo M, Kind 2002)
723



(222) Dar rdzong phan Islogs gling, Plate 1.
(Photo M. Kind 2002)
(222) Yang dgon Monastery, Plate 2
(Photo M. Kind 2002)
724



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
(223) Sam gling Monastery, Plate 1
(Photo M. Kind 2000)



PARA 2otas-fonda
(223) bsam gling Monastery, Plate 2 Ya ngal gdan sa
(Photo M. Kind 2000)
726



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
(224) mTha' srung mtsho gling Monastery
(Photo M. Kind 2002)
727



(225) sPung mo Temple, Plate 1
(Photo M. Kind 2002)
728



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
(225) sPu mer Temple, Plate 2
(Photo M. Kind 2002)
(225) Shug ri nyi shar Hermitage, Plate 3
(Photo M. Kind 1997)
729



(226) Yung drung 'gro 'dul gling Monastery, Plate 1
(Photo Yungdrung Wangyal 2002)
(226) gYung drung 'gro 'dul gling Monastery, Plate 2 Jag 'dul dgon pa ruins
(Photo Urs Furger 1996)
730



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
(230) Khri brtan nor bu rtse Monastery
1. Name
Bon dgon dpal ldan khri brtan nor bu rtse
2. Location
The monastery is located on the western outskirts of Kathmandu city. It is built
on the slope of a hill and has an extensive view overlooking the city. The place is
called Ropa by the local people and is in the vicinity of Swayambhunath stupa.
3. History
In 1986, Yongs 'dzin bsTan 'dzin rnam dag initiated the building of a house
built at this location with the financial help of an American friend. He thought that
a Bon religious centre in Kathmandu would be desirable considering that there are
fairly large areas in Nepal where the population adheres to the Bon religion and his
idea was unanimously supported by the Bonpo community in Kathmandu. It was
dPal 'byor nor bu, however, a resident of Kathmandu and a member of the Bonpo
community, who played the leading role in dealing with the purchase of land and
obtaining official permission for construction as well as fund-raising. When Yongs
'dzin bs Tan 'dzin mam dag went to visit Tibet from India he stayed in the new house
while in Kathmandu. While he was there, monks from different places came to see
him and he started giving them teachings. However, the actual temple was founded
in 1992 and a little later the work on the interior decoration and surrounding areas
were completed. In 1994, the consecration of the new assembly hall was carried out
by the abbot of Man ri in Dolanji and Yongs dzin bsTan 'dzin mam dag.
The establishment gradually developed into a monastery and dGe bshes Nyi ma
dbang rgyal was appointed as its first abbot by the abbot of Man ri Monastery in
Dolanji (No.231) and Yongs 'dzin bsTan 'dzin mam dag in 1992.
The monastery has an assembly hall ('du khang), a residence of the abbot (hla
brang) and a building that houses the library, guest rooms as well as rooms prepared
specially for computer work. There are also several buildings for accommodating
the monks.
The monastery has two distinct establishments: the shad grwa (centre for
studies of philosphy and logic) and the sgom grwa (centre for meditation practice).
In 1996, dGe bshes bsTan pa g-yung drung, who obtained his dge bshes degree in
sMan ri Monastery in Dolanji, became the dpon slob, the principal teacher. In 2001
he succeeded the abbot Nyi ma dbang rgyal as the second abbot of the monastery
Since then mKhan po bsTan pa g-yung drung has been in charge of the whole
establishment. Amongst other heavy duties, he supervises students as well as doing
his own research. In 2002, dGe bshes Tshul khrims bstan 'dzin was appointed as the
731



chief of the meditation centre.
4. Hierarchical system
- yongs dzin
- mkhan po
- sgom grwa'i mkhan po
- dpon slob
-dbu mdzad
- dge skos
- spyi gnyer
- mgron gnyer
- zla da gnyer pa
5. Number of monks
There are 117 monks from various parts of Nepal, mainly Dol po and Mustang,
as well as from Khyung po in Khams and from Amdo. A number of researchers in
Tibetology from various countries also either stay in the monastery for short periods
or pay visits.
6. The present educational system
The monks of the bshad grwa follow courses on such sujects as the classic
texts on philosophy and logic. They also read Tantras and rDzogs chen texts as well
as taking up studies in poetry, astrology, traditional medicine, metrology connected
with making stupas and mandalas as well as thangka painting. The courses last for
13 years, after which students are examined, mainly by debate, for the dge bshes
degree.
As for the students of the sgom grwa, the courses last 4 years during which
time they read and practise meditation based on A khrid, rDzogs chen bsgrags
pa skor gsum and Zhang zhung snyan brgyud. After completing the courses, the
successful candidates are issued a certificate for the title of gShen gyi mal 'byor ba.
7. Educational exchange
The monastery receives students from other monasteries in India such sManri
in Dolanji (No.231). It also sends its own students to sMan rias well as to dGe lugs
pa colleges in India.
8/9. Rituals
- 1st month: from 4 to 5, celebration of the birth of mNyam med Shes rab rgyal
mtshan; on the 5th there is also the renewal celebration of the dar shing and
the rlung rta with laymen from the Bonpo community in Kathmandu; on
732



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
the 8th, performance of cham, called gShen gyi gar 'cham; from 14 to 15,
a ceremony based on the gShen gyi dge spyod rnam par dag pa'i mdo; from
23 to 30, the monks of the bshad grwa practise the ritual of Mra seng while
those the sgom grwa perform the ritual devoted to Bla chen Dran pa nam
mkha';
- 4th month: from 12 to 16, performance of the ritual based on the Sa bdag nye
lam sde bzhi;
- 8th month: from 1 to 7 observation of the monastic discipline while the
laymen come to the monastery and practise the bsnyen gnas and smyung gnas
observations;
- 9th month: the 30th, commemoration of the death of gShen rab Mi bo;
- 10th month: from 1 to 21, intensified study of logic following the former
tradition of g Yung drung gling Monastery (No.2);
- 12th month: from 26 to 29, performance of the dgu gtor chen mo rite based on
the ritual cycle of Khro bo and Phur pa.
10. Books and manuscripts kept in the monastery
The monastery's library has a large collection of MSS and modern Tibetan and
Indian reprints of Bonpo works.
The monastery has established good working conditions for computerisation of
classical texts and other Bonpo works. It was the monks of this monastery who input
the whole catalogue of the Katen collection. This was published in 2001 by National
Museum of Ethnology, Osaka, Japan under the title of A Catalogue of the New
Collection of Bonpo Katen Texts, Bon Studies 4 (Senri Ethnological Reports 24) and
the texts contained in The Call of the Blue Cuckoo, published by the same institute
in 2002, Bon Studies 6 (Senri Ethnological Reports 32). The monastery publishes a
periodical entitled bGres po'i 'bel gtam once a year
This account of Khri brtan nor bu rtse Monastery is based on the Bal yul gnas
'khod bon dgon dpal Idan khri brtan nor bu rtse'i lo rgyus mdo tsam brjod pa gtsang
chab zegs ma by mKhan po bsTan pa g-yung drung composed in 2002, MS, 15
pages.
733



CA
(230) Khri brtan nor bu rtse Monastery, Plate 1
(Photo Y. Nagano 2003)
(230) Khri brtan nor bu rtse Monastery. Plate 2 The assembly hall
(Photo S.G. Karmay 1994)
734



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
(230) Khri brtan nor bu itse Monastery, Plate 3 Slob dpon bs Tan 'dzin mam dag (right) and mKhan po bs Tan
pa g-yung drung
(Photo Y. Nagano 2003)
735



(231) sMan ri Monastery in Dolanji
1. Name
dPal gshen bstan sMan ri'i gling
2. Location
The monastery is located in Dolanji. It can be reached from the town called
Solan in Himachal Pradesh. From Solan one can take either a bus or a taxi to go to
the monastery. The route passes through a small village called Ochgat and Dolanji
is a few kilometers away to the south of this village. In Dolanji the monastery is
situated on a hill above a Tibetan refugee settlement called Thob rgyal gsar pa.
3. History
In 1968, Shes rab bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan (1912-1962), the abbot of g Yung
drung gling Monastery (No.2) performed a ceremony in order to find a successor of
Shes rab blo gros (1935-1962), the 32nd abbot of Man ri Monastery (No.1). Sangs
rgyas bstan'dzin (b.1929) was elected by secret lot as the 33rd abbot of sMan ri.
He was elected without knowing while he was doing research in the University of
Oslo. He therefore soon returned to India. His name was then changed to Lung rtogs
bstan palinyi ma when he was enthroned as the abbot as the tradition requires. In
1969, he began to have an assembly hall built. Since then he devoted all his time to
the monastic establishment. Over the years, the monastery developed enormously. In
this he was supported by dPon slob Sangs rgyas bstan'dzin (1912-1978), the senior
teacher of Man ri Monastery in Tibet and dPon slob bsTan 'dzin nam dag (b.1926),
the junior teacher of the same monastery. The latter then became the senior teacher
in the monastery at Dolanji while dGe bshes gYung drung mam rgyal was appointed
as the junior teacher when the studies of philosophy and logic were established.
Later dPon slob bs Tan 'dzin mam dag was succeeded by dPon slob "Phrin las nyi ma
as the senior teacher.
The monastery consists of an assembly hall (du khang), the abbot's residence
(bla brang), the library (dpe mdzod), residences of the monks, buildings with rooms
for lectures and conferences. There is a dispensary, a house for the orphans that the
monastery keeps as well as cells for meditation retreats, a guest house and a building
for computer work. There is also an institute called Mu khri btsad po'i zhang bodrig
gzhung zhib 'jug khang. The monastery publishes annually a periodical called Bon
sgo.
4. Hierarchical system
-khri 'dzin
- yongs dzin
736



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
-dbu mdzad
- dge skos
- spyi gnyer
- gnyer pa
5. Number of monks
The monastery has about 250 monks mainly coming from Dolpo and other
areas in Nepal; from Khams, Amdo, Nag chu kha regions, Central Tibet as well as
mNga' ris, Western Tibet.
There are also European and American monks who follow the courses of
meditation as well as study. Scholars from various countries come and stay in the
monastery for doing research.
6. Current education
In 1978 courses in various traditional learning were established. They are
concerned with such sujects as the classic texts on philosophy and logic particularly
by mNyam med Shes rab rgyal mtshan and other masters. They also read Tantras
and rDzogs chen texts as well as taking up studies in poetry, astrology, traditional
medicine, metrology connected with making stupas and mandalas as well as the
thangka painting. After 8 years of study students can sit for examination mainly by
debate and finally obtain the dge bshes degree. From 1986 to 2002 about 57 students
obtained the dge bshes degree.
7. Educational exchange
Students are often sent to other religious schools, especially Triten Norbutse
(No.230) and the de lugs pa colleges in India on short periods. After obtaining
the dge bshes degree, the majority is either encouraged or voluntarily leave the
monastery. These monks go back to their own countries, such as Dolpo in Nepal and
Tibet where they try to re-establish either the monastic tradition or just help revive
cultural traditions that were lost or discouraged. Some of these monks also go to
Western countries where they establish Bonpo centres of learning and meditation
practice.
8/9. Rituals
- 1st month: from 4th to 5th, celebration of the birth of mNyam med Shes
rab rgyal mtshan in many monasteries in Tibet this was taken as the
commemoration of the death of the master), around the middle of this month
there is the performance of 'cham such as gShen gyi gar'cham, rTsed sna'i
rol 'cham and Zhang zhung gi shon gar; from 6 to 16, the examination of
737



the dge bshes degree (this takes place only every two year); from 14 to 16,
celebration of the birth of gShen rab Mi bo; from 22 to 23, performance of the
ritual cycle of Margyud; from 23 to 30, the ritual cycle of the wisdom deity,
sMra ba'i seng ge. It then ends with the bestow of the empowerment initiation
of the deity by the abbot for the monk students.
- 3nd month: 1st day, commemoration of dPon slob Sangs rgyas bstan 'dzin and
performance of the ritual cycle of Tshe dbang rig 'dzin;
- 4th month: from 14 to 15, recitation of the bka''gyur,
- 5th month: from 12 to 16, religious services, particularly based on the
mKha'klong gsang mdos for the people of Thob rgyal gsar pa, the refugee
settlement;
- 6th month: on the 10, during the day, performance of the bskang gso ritual for
the religious protectors and during the night the chanting of the bskang 'bum;
- 7th month: from 14 to 15, commemoration of Shes rab bstan pa'i rgyal
mtshan, the 10th abbot of g Yung drung gling;
- 8th month: the 8th, commemoration of Shes rab blo gros, the 32nd abbot of
sMan ri;
- 9th month: the 9th, celebration of the arrival of Mu cho ldem drug to 'Ol mo
lung ring; from 23 to 29, performance of the ritual cycle of sTag la;
- 10th month: the 4th, commemoration of Khyung sprul 'Jigs med nam mkha'i
rdo rje; from 23 to 29, performance of the ritual cycle of Khro bo; the 30th,
commemoration of the death of gShen rab Mi bo:
- 11th month: from 7 to 8, commemoration of skyabs mgon Zla ba rgyal
mtshan (1796-1862); from 23-29, performance of the ritual cycles of Khro bo
and Phur pa;
- 12th month: from 27 to 29, performance of the ritual cycle of Khro bo and
Phur pa ending with the dgu gtor chen mo rite.
11. Books and manuscripts kept by the monastery
The Library has a good collection of MSS and modern Indian and Tibetan
reprints of Bonpo works
This account of Man ri Monastery is based on the information given in the
dPal gshen bstan sman ri'i gling gi lo rgyus rags bsdus by mkhan po bsTan pa
8-yung drung written in 2002, MS, 10 pages.
738



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
(231) sMan ri Monastery in Dolanji, Plate 1 The assembly hall
(Photo S. G. Karmay 1996)
(231) sMan ri Monastery in Dolanji. Plate 2 Residence of the abbot
(Photo H. Blezer 1998)
739



(231) sManri Monastery in Dolanji, Plate 3 mKhan chen Lung rtogs bstan
pali nyi ma
(Photo Tenpa Yungdrung 2001)
740



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
(232) Gling tshang Monastery
1. Name of the monastery
Dza sMon rgyal g-yung drung gling
2. Location
Settlement of Gling tshang from Kham, Manduwala, Dehradun, UP, India
3. History
The monastery was founded by dGe slong 'Phrin las rgya mtsho in 1974 on a
piece of land near the Gling tshang settlement. The land was allotted by Gyal sras
'Jigs med dbang 'dus of Gling tshang who was the head of the refugee camp. The
monastery is a resettlement of the same name in Kham, Tibet which was a private
religious establishment of the king of Gling in Derge, and the Bonpo lama Hum
chen 'gro 'dul gling pa, the Sixth Kun grol, was the prelate of this king. Because
of these relations in Tibet the head of the Gling tshang settlement in Dehradun
wished that the monastery be built near the settlement. Man ri Monastery in Dolanji
appointed rTogs Idan br Tson 'grus rgyal mtshan as the abbot of the monastery and in
1996 he was succeeded by dGe bshes Nyi ma grags pa. The owner of the monastery
(dgon bdag) is Kun grol Nam mkha' 'phrin las dbang rgyal, the 7th Kun grol.
4. Hierarchical system
-dgon bdag, owner of the monastery
- mkhan po, abbot
5. Number of monks
At present there are five monks.
6. Current education
The monks practise their meditation following the tradition of Shar rdza bra
shis rgyal mtshan.
This is compiled by Nyima Woser Choekhortshang.
741



Sikkim
(233) Zhu gYung drung kun grags gling Monastery
1. Name of monastery
Zhu gyung drung kun grags gling
2. Location
Southern Sikkim, in Kuisang/Kuising
3. History
The temple was built in the late 1980s by a certain gYung drung tshul
khrims who, although not himself of the Zhu lineage, had connections with that
family - hence the name of the temple. He himself is said to be the proprietor of a
photo-studio in Gangtok.
4. Hierarchical system
There is one monk, named rNam rgyal, a product of sMan ri Monastery
(No.231) in Dolanji, who is taking care of the teaching at the temple.
5. Number of monks/ priests
There are about a dozen young monks from local families.
6. The present educational system
See above.
7. Personnel and educational exchange of monks between monasteries
Very limited exchange for the present, although the temple does receive visits
from colleagues of rNam rgyal from Dolanji.
11. Books and manuscripts kept by the monastery
Mainly modern Indian reprints of Bonpo works.
12. Economic circumstances of temple
The temple is supported by donations from the families of the young monks.
14. Economic occupation of the local population
The villagers in the vicinity of the temple are mainly sedentary farmers.
742



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
Appendix : Excerpts from the history of the Ya ngal clan
The following is the geneaolgy of the Ya ngal clan according to the Ya ngal
gdung rabs (YDR). It is not, however, a straighforward translation of the text, which
rather confusingly shifts from one lineage to another and which includes a great
deal of obscure information. The genealogy as it is presented here deals first with
the line of gSung rab skyabs and then with the descendants of Phur pa skyabs since
the clan is divsible into these two major lineages. Each individual is identified by a
number referring to his generation and a letter which denotes his age with respect to
the other siblings. If YDR includes any information about an individual, the salient
points will be entered after his name - such as a new name following ordination
(Ishul ming), his wife (W) if she is mentioned, his accomplishments, and of course
his descendants. In all but a few cases, daughters are not named, where they are,
they will be indicated by the sign D and not a lower case letter since they are usually
named after the sons irrespective of their age. The form of the following genealogy
is based on that used by Jackson in his study of the Mustang royal family (1980),
but with certain modifications. The text does not trace just one lineage but often lists
the descendants of each of several brothers, and the same number and letter (e.g. 6a,
65 and 16a in the first lineage) may therefore refer to several individuals.
The lineage of gSung rab skyabs
1 mKhas pa sman pa
2a gSung rab skyabs
2b gSung rab 'bum
W: Nyi la chos dbyangs
2a gSung rab skyabs
3 Shes rab rgyal mtshan! W: gNya' mo bkra shis
4a Dam pa 'Bum rje 'od
...was himself an incarnation of a vidyadhara, and in a previous life, when he
was a learned hermit, he reached 'Ol mo lung ring in the land of rTag gzigs through
the power of his magical wisdom. From inside a crystal stupa which had originated
by itself he carried the relics of the Teacher [gShen rab) to Tibet, and later said
that he was an incarnation of] Dran pa nam mkha'... Moreover, that bla ma, who
had mastered the three studies and who had filled his life with achievements, set
his footprint on the nexk of Mt. Kailash. ...Later, after he had gone to the realm of
phenomenal space, the bla ma said, "I, as one wo have attained sunyata, have cut
off my speech and mind (?). Do not burn my body, but take it to the mountains". His
disciples requested a relic fo rhte sake of future generations of living beings. A relic
emerged from his nose and it may still be seen (YDR fols 37a-38a).
743



4b bkra shis rgyal mtshan, "Gro mgon Klu brag pa"?
4c Jo Icam Byang chub sems ma (mother of rTogs ldan dbon po).
4bbkra shis rgyal mtshan
5a Bla ma sngags paw : gNyag mo dngos grub
...went to Bi cher in Dolpo. [He and his wife) had many sons, who did not
survive, but there were three (surviving) children whom they brought up (YDR 40b).
Sb Ngos blang rgyal mtshan "bum
His lineage increased in Klu brag (YDR 40b).
5D Drang srong ma
5a Bla ma sngags pa
!
6a Bha su
...died at the age of twenty-one
6b Sems dpagsal
...was a bla ma who, according to the prophesy, taught the word of Bon in
the land of the incarnation (?) of the Dakini Co za bon mo, and he is said to have
become a protector of the doctrine. [It is not clear whether this passage refers to the
following bla ma or to Bla ma sngags pa. If the latter this bla ma is nameless and
Sems dpa' gsal is the tshul ming of Bla ma sngags pa.] At the age of seventeen he
took his vows in teh presence of the abbot Klu brag pa i.e. bkra shis rgyal mtshan,
his grandfather), who gave him the name of Sems dpa' gsal. he meditated for many
years on the wrathful deities at Gong'gra monastery, but he was not arrogant about
the results of his meditation and spiritual achievements.... His worthy (disciples)
had a vision of his body appearing in self-originated light, and after a short time he
shook his body three times and passed into heaven as a rainbow (YDR 400-41b).
6d bra shis tsho mo
Sb Ngos blang [here Drung pa) rgyal mtshan
6a dBal dar 'bum
...took his vows from Bru ston Tshul khrims rgyal mtshan. His tshul ming was
mKhan po bSod nams rgyal mtshan, and he was, besides, an incarnation of Dran pa
(nam mkha'). Concerning the account of his enslavement of the goblin Kye rang and
his retinue, he became dreadfully angry and merely displayed a face like the stripes
of a tigress and, without the sightest fear in his heart, that bla ma performed the
"production" (utpannakrama) meditation for his tuetlary deity and caused the goblin
to disappear (YDR 43a).
6b IHargod skyabs
6c Ge khod tshe ring
744



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
6c Ge khod tshe ring
7a Nam mkha' dbang rgyal
7b Phur pa mkha' 'gro
7a Nam mkha' dbang rgyal
8a Drung pa nyi ma rgyal mtshan
...was born in a Tiger year. [There follows an obscure passage which attributes
the origins of a particular proverb to an event in his life] (YDR 43b).
8a Drung pa nyi ma rgyal mtshan
9a bsTan pa bsam grub
...was the great Tshe dbang rigdzin who accepted birth among men. Forever
saying "Sa le 'od" he saw the face of Kun tu bzang po. The imprints of his hands
and feet [in rock) were a token of his constancey. He bound with an oath the retinue
of the goblin Kye rang, the protector of the doctrine. He had a vision in which he
went or the assembly of vidyadhara, and he carried the deeds of Khro bo dbang
chen from heaven, from the assembly of vidyadhara (YDR fols 435-44a).
9b Phun tshogs dbang rgyal
9b Phun tshogs dbang rgyal
10 bsTan pa 'od zer skye pa
...was a bodhisattva and was the author of bsKang 'bum, and so on, and of
many religious discourses.
11a Rig 'dzin dus pa
11b Khro bo bsam grub
11b Khro bo bsam grub
12a gYung drung rgyal mtshan
13a Drung pa Rin chen dbang rgyal
...was the incarnation of the mind of stong rgyung [mthu chen). That bla ma
repeated the Ngan song dong sprugs mantra ten million times. He spat on a wall and
the letter A appeared; and above all, the guardians of Bon of the Secret Treasure, the
three powerful demons who are the protectors of the doctrine, accompanied him as if
they were his body and smell (YDR fol 44b).
13b Nyi ma rgyal mtshan
13D The daughter went to rDzong in the Muktinath valley) as a bride, and had one
son. Then she renounced the world and entered the religious life, and became the
accomplished bodhisattva Rig 'dzin dbang mo (YDR fol 44b).
745



13b Nyi ma rgyal mtshan
14a Tshe dbang bsam grub
15a sKyi tshal (tshul ming: bs Tan 'dzin rgyal mtshan)
15b Bla ma phun tshogs
15c Tshe dbang
15a bsTan 'dzin rgyal mtshan
16a "Phrin las phun tshogs
15b Bla ma phun tshogs
16a Bla ma gar skyabs
...had two (unnamed) sons, one of whom died in childhood (YDR fol 45a).
16a "Phrin las phun tshogs
17a 1Ha rgod
182 dBang rgyal
...had three children of whom two died in childhood (YDR fol 45a). After
leaving) this one son and two daughters, their mother died while she was for they
were) young, and Yang ston dBang rgyal lost interest in the wold. He took his
novice's vows in Dolpo from Yang ston gTsug phud rgyal mtshan, who gave him
the ishul ming of Blo gros rgyal mtshan. Then after he had gone to dBus gTsang,
his one son also died. He went to Dolpo to adopt a son, but his gracious root bla ma
Yang ston g Tsug phud rgyal (mtshan) said, "The lineage has now reached the point
of extinction, and I, your root-bla ma, have considered the situation. Renounce your
vows." Then after taking stock of the bla ma's command, Yang ston Blo gros rgyal
mtshan returned [home]. There his mother and sister would not let him renounce,
and he went to Nag tshang in the north, where his patrons made hm the focal point
of their faith. gShen Khri Rinpoche said that he was a minifestation of Dran pa nam
mkha'. When he returned (to Dolpo], he performed the meditation of Brag lung
dkar mo, and in his dwelling place in a big mountain hermitage he went to heaven
without leaving any physical body (fol. appended to fol 45).
The lineage of Phur pa skyabs
W; sNya mo kun skyid
1 Khu tsho
2 Phur pa skyabs
3a Gyal mtshan rinchen
3b Blo gros bstan rgyal
3c sTon rgod
3b Blo bon lha "bum
746



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
[The four sons) were incarnations of vidyadhara, and, as it says in the prophesy,
"in mNg'ris stod there will apperar one called Yang ngal sTod rgod, who will also
hold the lineage of the doctrine which Khod spungs Dran pa taught to men". That
Yang ngal teacher came to Klu brag for the sake of living beings, and the yak on
which he was riding left its ootprint, and the bla ma left the imprint of his hand.
That bla ma met his tutelary deity in manifestation, and his guardian assisted him. In
partcular, if he asked something of rGyal po Nyi pang sad, he would accomplish it
(YDR 42a-42b).
3b Blo gros bstan rgyal
4a Khri gtsug g-yung drung
4b Slob dpon zil gnon
3c bs Tan rgod
4 mKhan po Grags rgyal
3d
4a
4b
Blo bon lha 'bum
Ha rgod 'bum
Khro rgyal skyabs
4a Ha rgod 'bum
5a dGe bsnyen
SbmKha''gro
5c Bon skyongs skyabs
These four wise ones were blessed, and whoever met them would certainly not
fall into the lower realms. To their worth disciples they appeared in bodies of light
(YDR 42b).
4b Slob dpon Zil gnon
5a Nam mkha' blo gros
Sb gYung drung rgyal po
It is said tht he repeated the Ngan song dong sprugs mantra ten million times,
that there were many and various signs of his achievement relating to his general
qualities, and that he actually received the prostrations and offerings of the asuras,
4 mKhan po Grags rgyal [here drag dbang)
5a Don grub dpal
56 dBang Idan bzang po
747



Through being (or according to?) an incarnation of gShen Bha da bhi sha
his name was dBal la bzang po (?). By virtue of his sudden relaisation he caused
the transmitted doctrine to spread. That teacher wrote the gSung rab 'bum in 113
volumes, and clarified the doctrine in Lo and Dolpo. He appears in all religious
treatises as Rab gnas mkhan po Drung pa dBang Idan bzang po. When he achieved
sudden realisation he lived downstairs [i.e. inside his house) for three summers, and
upstairs [i.e. outside for three winters, and several inferior people called him "Mad
dPal bzang". Thn the bla ma became angry and magically caused a knot to appear in
a piece of iron, and so forth, and many other miracles occurred (YDR fols. 46a-46b).
Sa Nam mkha'blo gros
6a Nam mkha' rin chen
...thoroughly practised the service and worship of the wrathful deity Phur pa
and was one who had achieved mastery over "production" and "completion" (YDR
fol 47a).
5 dGe bsnyen mkha' 'gro (on fol 42b dGe bsnyen and mKha' 'gro are two
separate sons of IHa rgod 'bum).
6a gYung drung mgon po
...remained in an attitude of worship for his entire life. At the age of 63 his
spirit dissolved into the realm of phenomena in a rainbow. As a visible sign for
the reverence of future generations, sacred relics and so forth as well as many self
originated objects appeared (YDR fol 47a).
5a Don grub dpal
6a Nyi ma rgyal po
...thoroughly practised the service and worship of his tutelary, the Red and
Blank Garudas. He was seen to direct hail with his fingers and was a superior
individual who subdued fierce serpent-gods and local genii. That incarnation of
the mind of Samantabhadra, Yang ston g Yung drung rgyal mtshan repeated the
mantra "Sa le 'od" one hundred million times and was an excellent man who had
thoroughly perfected the three studies (YDR fols 47a-47b).
6b gYung drung mam rgyal
...took monastic vows and was given the tshul ming gYung drung rgyal mtshan,
[This would seem to imply that the qualities and achievements attributed to his elder
brother Nyi ma rgyal po are actually his.]
6a Nam mkha'rin chen
7a gYung drung bstan pa
7b Rig 'dzin bon skyabs
748



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
...received the name Yang ston gYung drung tshul khrims on taking the vows
of a novice, and he was the excellent incarnation of a great bla ma. For the sake of
future generations he erected many triple stupas, and was one thoroughl versed in
the Three Studies (YDR fol 47b).
7e Tshul khrims bsam grub
7d Rin chen mam rgyal
7a gYung drung bstan pa
...was the incarnation of a vidyadhara and became a master of the doctrine
(YDR fol 48b).
8b 'Ôn chung
...sat in a cave, a bodhisattva meditating as a layman. ...Once, when that bla
ma was 39 years old, he bent for fell] over in a cave and lost consciousness. It is
said that Khyung ston (i.e. Khyung ston Tshul khrims legs pa, with whom he was
apparently studying at the time] blew a conch from a hill-top, and the Ima regained
consciousness and sat up, clear in his thoughts (YDR fol 48a)
8D not named
8D not named
7d Rin chen ram rgyal
8a bkra shis rgyal mtshan
...became a monk and receved initiations, instructions and mental teachings
from Khyung ston Tshul khrims 'od zer. Throughout his life he (preserved) an
attitude of worship ans service and he met his tutelary deity. In particular, it is said
that while meditating on the Yi dam Me ri he joined his hands and cause a fire to be
lit, as well as doing other such things (YDR fol 48b).
8b Rin chen mam rgyal W: mKhan Drung ma dpal 'dzin
8c gYung drung phun tshogs
8b Rin chen rgyal mtshan
9a gYung drung ram rgyal
...was an incarnation of gShen Tshad med 'od Idan, and his tshul ming was
Tshul khrims rgyal mtshan (YDR fol 49a).
9b Bla ma bstan Tha W : Sa rgya ma yum bu dgos 'dzom, the Dakini of
Action
9c Rin chen Ihun grub W : Bu bom mchog
...had the tshul ming Rin chen rgyal mtshan and wrote innumerable teachings
and religious works. While he was copying the] Dri med gzi brid, which was
about as long as an arrow, each time he dipped his pen into the inkpot a line of
words was written, which was a sign of his general accomplishments (YDR fol 49a:
749



see also Snellgrove, The Nine Ways of Bon, 1980, p. 4 fn. 1).
9d. Shes rab ngyal mtshan
9bbsTan lha (sTag Iha here)
10a Srid dar mam rgyal
...lost interest in the world, and on taking the vows of a novice he received
the tshul ming Yang ston 'Od zer rgyal mtshan, the mind manifestation of Tag Iha
whose name resounds high and low and everywhere like the roar of the dragon. The
initiations, teachings and explanations which he gave were like a flowing stream,
and he amassed about two hundred disciples from high and low who wore Bon like
a hat. As one who was a holder of the doctrine he acquired many powers for the
protection of living beings. He eventually died at the age of 63, on the 8th day of
the 4th month in a Rat Year. In the vision of rTogs Idan bsTan pa rgyal mtshan, he
manifested his light body as a rainbow-tent in the sky, and pssed into heaven (YDR
fol 495-50a).
10b Bla ma rin chen
9d Shes rab rgyal mtshan
10a 1Ha rgod
His monastic name was gYung drung rgyal mtshan. He established a monastery
in Tarap, and besides this he spread the doctrine (YDR fol 50a).
10b Khro bo mam rgyal
...became a holder of the doctrine who was an expert in both the "religion of
gods" (lha chos) and the "religion fo men" (mi chos). He had three sons, but prior
to that he had been sGo dwags khri ba, a bla ma who had taken the three vows, and
floowing the death (of this bla ma) he became Yang ston g Yung drung mam rgyal
[possibly 6.b, above, the son of Yang ston Don grub dpal] (YDR fol Sla).
10a IHa rgod
lla Shes rab 'od zer
9c Rin chen rgyal mtshan
10a dos 'byor
...was (also called Ye shes rgyal mtshan, and as a hermit he took the name
g Tsug phud rgyal mtshan. gShen Mi'gyur btsug phud said that he was an emanation
of gShen rab 'Dod pa dgu 'gyur. As a representation of his body he erected so many
stupas for the Three Potectors (Ku byi mang ke, A ti mu wer and dBal chen Ge khod
gsang ba drag chen) and others, as a reprsentation of his speech he copied out the
Khams brgyad and so many other treatises, and as a representation of his mind he
painted a thangka showing the ten deeds [of gShen rab). These made up the triad of
translator, sage and principal teacher. Moreover, by means of the many monasteries
750



Bonpo monasteries and temples of the Himalayan region
[which he built] he acted as a moderate leader and protector (?) and he became a
great contemporary master of the doctrine.
As a sign of the manifested accomplishments of the superior powers he had gained,
his horse left the imprint of its hoof in rock]. he acquired about three hundred
disciples form high and low and everywhere, adn several of them became siddhas.
He bacame a great master of the doctrine. Finally, at the age of 66, on the 10th
day of the 4th month in a wood horse year, he passed upward into the realm of
phenomena amidst a tent of rainbow light and a rain of flowers, and many other
wonders besides. His body caught fire of its own accord and on his bones htere
appeared six syllables and innumerable images of deities and so on, and he became a
great lamp of the doctrine (YDR fols 50b, 516, 51 barma).
10b Unnamed: died in childhood
100 g Yung drung mam rgyal
10b Khro bo rnam rgyal [Apart from the three sons listed here] *he had many sons
who did not survive, and six daughters who lived' (YDR fol 51a)
11a bsTan pa rgyal mtshan
11b Mi'gyur rgyal mtshan
...achieved independence in his own mind when he was young; having gone to
tend the flocks, he went into a cave and sat there in meditation for about three days.
At the age of eighteen he went to a mountain retreat in a remote place and abstained
from speaking for about three years, in addition to which he did nothing but practise
austerities. He sat for nine years behind closed doors, and received many prophecies
from and frequently saw the face of Tshe dbang rig 'dzin. Due to some impediment
his life did not run its natural course, but at the age of thirty one, on the seventeenth
day of the third month in a Horse year, he passed while meditating into the realm of
phenomena. Upon his body there appeared the six syllables, and there also appeared
many images of gods and sacred relics, but due to some pollution some of these flew
away and some dispersed. That excellent incarnation was in fact an emanation of
the mind of Tshe dbang rig 'dzin, and he was also an emanation of the voice of Khri
gtsug bstan'dzin (YDR fol 1 og ma a -1 'og ma b).
llc Shes rab 'od zer
Notes
1 For a summary of the relevant events in his life, see the outline of the history of Klu brag
given above.
2 See note 1 above
3 See note 1 above
751



Acknowledgements
The sections concerning Klu brag, in Nepal, were compiled principally by Charles
Ramble. We are deeply grateful to the people of Klu brag for their generosity in providing the
information and for making the relevant textual sources available. Particular thanks are due to
the late Lama Gyaltsen, to Lama Tshultrim, Tshewang Tenzin, Palsang, and Geshe Yungdrung
Gyaltsen.
The compilation of the information on the monasteries of Dolpo was mainly the work of
Marietta Kind. We would like to thank the people of Dolpo for their hospitality and support
during various field trips. As special sources of insight and inspiration, we wish to thank Sitar
Baigy with his family, geshe Samdrup Nyima, lama Yungdrung
Gyalthsan and all the drawas in Tsho; Samdrup Lama with his family, Geshe Yungdrung
Wangyal, Lama Namkha Gyalpo, lama Yungdrung Yise and Geshe Sherab Nyima, Norbu
Lama and Lhabu Lama and all the grwa pa in Pugmo; Geshe Tenzin Nyima Wozer in
Kag-Hurikot; in Samling Yungdrung Dargye Lama, Yangton Sherab Tenzin and his son and
Chime Yungdrung; in Do-Tarap Dawa Lama and the grwa pa, and in Kathmandu all the Dolpo
monks who contributed supplementary information or corrections. We are also indebted to
Lcona Mason for early field enquiries carried out in Dolpo.
The accounts of Man ri in Dolanji and Khri brtan nor bu rtse in Kathmandu monasteries
were compiled by Samten Karmay based on the information provided in two works by
mkhan po bsTan pa g-yung drung: dPal gshen bstansman ri' gling gi lo rgyus rags bsdus
(2002, MS, 10 pages) and Balyul gnas 'khod bon dgon dpal Idan khri brtan nor burtse'i lo
rgyus mdo tsam brjod pa gtsang chab zegs ma (2002, MS, 15 pages).
The data concerning Gling tshang and Zhu Ri zhing g Yung drung kun grags gling
monasteries were provided by Nyima Woser Choekhortshang.
Charles Ramble and Marietta Kind



Terms of governing system and duties in monasteries



Terms of govering system and duties in monasteries
Terms of governing system and duties in monasteries
dkon gnyer see dkor gnyer
dkor gnyer, caretaker, keeper, custodian, performing the bsang ceremony, and making general
announcements
sku tshab, often assistant of spyi ba (..)
bukang 'don see a mchod
khang gnyer sec dkor gayer
khang tshan dge rgan, hostel chief
khri pa, 'one who holds the throne', monks of special status within a monastery who act as
the head of the monastery in rotation
khri pa bla ma, the monastic who holds the throne for a limited period
khri 'dzin, "throne holder", abbot
mkhan po. abbot, rector
grwa dpor, a leader of a particular group of monks
grwa tshang spyi gnyer, treasurer of a monastery
grwa tshang bla ma, a monk who holds much the same position as that of khri pa bla ma
dge skos, disciplinarian
dge rgan, senior monk, teacher, chief of a hostel, cf. khang tshan dge rgan
dge g-yog, assistant disciplinarian
dgon bdag, head of a monastery, often hereditary
mgon khang bla ma, chaplain, of, a mchod
ngon bia, contraction of mgon khang bla ma (Q.1)
mgron gnyer, steward
'go bdag bla ma, one who replaces the head of a monastery and performs the rituals in his
absence
rgan pa, 'senior', a term sometimes used for gnyer pu, treasurer
rgyaltshab, apostle, successor of a previous head of an establishment
rgyal tshab bla ma see rgval tshah
rgpu gnyer see gnyer pa
rgyun gnyer, store-keeper
sgrub bla, head of a particular establishment within a monastery
dngul gnyer see gryer pa
dngul bdag see gnyer pa
chang ma, beer-dispenser
chu len, novices who fetch water in a monastery
chos khrims pa, proctor
mchod gnyer see machod dpon
mchod dpon, sacristan
mchod g-yog, assistant sacristan
"cham gnyer, the monastic in charge of the 'cham dance
'cham dpon see 'cham gnyer
ja gnyer, assistant cook
ja mar, secondary cook
ja g-yog, one who washes dishes, cleans kitchen and tends fire
jo mo bla ma, nuns' priest
755



gnyer pa, treasurer, often responsible for monastery's upkeep, steward, manager
gnver ma, often assistant of gnyer pa (4.v.)
dung 'bud, novice in charge of the call of assembly by blowing the conch shell
do dam pa, superintendent
drung yig, secretary
gdung 'dzin, successor in a hereditary line
bdag gnyer, caretaker, cf. dkor gnyer
spyi khyab, general controller, cf. do dam pa
spyi gso, accountant
dpe khrid, teacher
dpon slob, chief teacher
spyi gnye, general treasurer
spyi phyag, general treasurer
spyi ba, treasurer, manager, one who oversees expenses for religious festivals, and collects
offerings, their investment and the use of the resulting profit
spyidbu bla ma, community head bla ma (..)
sprul sku, reincarnated lama, either the head of a monastery or occupies a special position in a
monastery
phan Ishun che mo, supervisor of political and economic matters
phyag mdzod, treasurer, often that of abbot's residence
hon slob, chief teacher, cf. dpon slob
byang 'dren, chief chanter, cf. dhu mdzad
bla brang gnyer pa treasurer of abbot's residence
bla ma, head of either a monastery or an establishment within a monastery
bla ma'i gnyer pa, treasurer of the head bla ma in a monastery
dbu skyor, assistant of dbu mdzad (q..)
dhu mkhyen, chanter, of. dbu mdzad
dbu hla, head of a monastery; chaplain of a local chief
dbu mdzad, chief chanter, chief of chorus, choir-master, precentor
dhu y-yog, assistant of the chief chanter
dbon po, an administrator of a monastery and its estates often connected with a hereditary line
of the head of a monastery
dhyur bdag, leader of the dbyar gnas ritual
'bud pa, musician
mar chen, chef
risis pa, accountant
tshang dpon, chef, one who tends fire
zla dag gnyer pa, assistant of a manager
yig mkhan, secretary, copyist
yongs dzin, teacher, tutor, supervisor
g-yung drung slob dpon, supreme master
las sne, monastic official, one who deals with the organization of religious services (zhabs
brtan)
las pa, attendant
shog dpon, person dealing with the affairs of a subdivision within a monastery
bsang gtong, person dealing with the performance of the bsang ceremony
756



Terms of governing system and duties in monasteries
slob dpon, chief teacher
gser khri, literally "gold throne", term applied to a monk either elected often by secret lot or
appointed by the general assembly to occupy the monastic throne
gsol kha ba see a mchod
Iha gnyer see a mchod
a mchod, chaplain, a monk in charge of daily services in the sgrub khang



Index



Ka
ka ga ser mo 172
ka ca 548
ka co 475, 548, 549
ka smad mgo 431
ka tsi 598
ka bzos sribs 173
ka yam kro 564
ka ye 300, 406, 408
ka ru grub dbang bstan 'dzin Ihun grub 87
ka ru sgrub dbang bstan 'dzin rin chen 671
ka legs dgon 173
ka legs g-yung drung gling 173
ka lo 564
ka shul 523, 530
ka shul gong ma 530
ka shul 'gab ma 530
kan lho 272,586,666, 667
karma bstan skyong dbang po 77
karma phug 70
karma ye shes 436
kailash 70, 78, 684, 698, 743
ki tshal 607
ku ne 'bru tse 624
ku byi mang ke 750
kug rje 453
kun dkar 'od ldan 177
kun khyab gling 165, 167
kun khyab bde chen gling gi dkar chag 633
kun mkhyen nyi ma bsod nams grags pa 209
kun mkhyen ye shes snying po 155
kun mkhyen ye shes blo gros 36,439
kun mkhyen sangs rgyas grags pa 87, 88, 155
kun grags ma 69
kun grol grags pa 185,255, 345, 363, 437, 556
kun grol grags pa 'ja' tshon snying po 363
kun grol 'ja' tshon snying po 359, 367, 369, 375, 378, 381, 408, 415, 416
kun grol bdud 'dul gling pa 368, 428
kun grol hum chen 184, 359, 360, 368, 437
kun grol hum chen 'gro 'dul gling pa 184
kun dga'rgyal mtshan 138, 179, 330, 527, 567, 634
kun dga'rnam rgyal 386
kun dga' phun shogs 612
kun dga' blo gros 398
kun dga' dbang dan 87, 88, 110, 116
kun dga' 'od 'phro 173
761



kun dga' ye shes 397
kun dga' lhun grub 482, 490, 527
kun tu bzang po 84, 119, 152, 745
kun bde gling 137
kun Idan rin chen 557
kun snang khyab pa 155
kun dbyangs 276
kun dbyings 140, 256, 287
kun dbyings sku Inga'i cho ga 256
kun 'brog 529, 547, 548
kun 'brog g-yung drung dgon pa'i lo ngyus mdor bsdus 548
kun gtsang 261
kun bzang grags pa 153, 154
kun bzang rgyal ba rgya mtsho 188,328, 370
kun bzang rgyal ba 'dus pa 76, 81, 88, 135, 144, 345, 423,591
kun bzang rgyal mtshan 30, 273-275, 318, 322, 329-331, 406, 407, 565, 568, 620
kun bzang nyi ma 438, 441
kun bzang batan 'dzin 397
kun bzang rdo rje 407
kun bzang rnam rgyal 426
kun bzang mo 69
kun bzang tshang 253
kun bzang 'tsho 274
kun bzang zhi ba 287
kun bzang ye shes 331
kun bzang g-yung drung 397
kun bzang rin chen 319,321,323
kun bzang Ihun grub 230, 566, 591
kun bzan rgyal ba 'dus pa'i lha khang 88
kun rig 140, 142, 204, 256, 276, 287, 360, 370, 382, 399, 402, 408, 456, 522
kun rig khang tshan 522
kun rigsgron ma 256
kun rig sgrol ma 360
kun rig gnas tong dbang chen 399
kun rig gnas 'dren rgyas pa 287
kun gsal byams ma 256,361
kun gsal byams ma'i sngags sgrub 361
kun gsal blo gros 33, 45, 399
kur bu 548
keng rus 423,475
ko dgon 592
ko ston sbyin pa rgyal mtshan 120
ko bo kun bzang 120
ko bo ye shes rgyal mtshan 119, 120, 169
ko tsa 523
ko tshang 593
762



kong rje 226
kong po 31, 75, 78, 95, 113, 114, 117, 120, 121, 139, 152, 169, 226, 228, 229, 253, 264,
398, 399, 469, 608
kong po bon ri 75,95, 117, 121, 152, 226, 469
kong sprul yon tan rgya mtsho 409
kong btsun de mo 172, 226, 227
kong tsha dbang Idan 653
kong bza' khri Icam 226
kong yul sku zhabs 503
kod po 610
kor tag 548
kyab kya bo 561
kyu ra 'od zer 114
kyung bo la ga 300
kye khri 626
kye ma 'od mtsho 185, 319
kye rang skrag med 675
kyong te 654
krung gling kha 215-218
kre ba 141, 715
kro'u tshang 334
klu skyabs 421
klu khang 70, 424
khu khang phug 70
klu mkhar dgon 113
klu mgon 421
klu rgyal 151, 420, 421
klu rting phur gsum 143
klu thar 421, 617
klu thar rgyal 617
klu nang 223
klu phug 83, 122, 130, 143-145, 147, 148, 150, 154
klu bu gsum 626
klu brag 671,672, 674-684, 693,744, 747,751, 752
klu dbang rgyal po 363
klu 'bum 252, 253, 431-436, 443, 612, 650, 699
klu 'bum dgon gyi lo rgyus 431
klu 'bum mtha'rten gling 431
klu 'bum 'brug 650
klu 'bum yag 612
klu 'bum bsod nams 252
klu mo 69, 252
klong rgyas sgrub skor 712
klong rgyas sgrub pa 526, 587
klong rgyas cho ga 402, 525
klong rgyas mchod pa 287, 583, 681
763



klong rgyas tshogs chen 594
klong rgyas mandala 286
.
klong chen rab 'byams pa 408
dka'thub 501, 502
dkar sgong 619
dkar stod 188
dkar mo srid rgyal 135, 228, 229
dkar smad 188
dkar tshang 205, 281, 284, 295
dkar mdzes 358. 368, 374,415,417, 420, 422, 445, 454, 457, 464, 481, 489,667
dkar mdzes rdzong gi sa cha'i ming btus 417
dkar ya nge 126
dkar ye 614
dkar ru 95, 174
dkar shul 83
dkar shod 151
dkon cog dge 229
dkon mchog yon tan 590, 615
dkyil bcugs kha 267
dkyis 'khorthang 154
bka' skyong gdangs yig 286
bka' 'gyur khang 76, 79, 104, 185
bka 'gyur lha khang 74, 88
bka' brgyad brgyud 396
bka' brgyud 144, 203, 241, 337, 358, 396
bka gnyan dung dkar mar rgyan 370
bka' thang kun snang gsal sgron 183
bka' thang phug 70
bka'lung rgya mtsho 255
bka' shag 375
bka' srung 622
bkra shis dge rgyas mtha' brtan gling 715
bkra shis mgon 407
bkra shis rgyal mtshan 155, 184-187, 208-210, 253, 255, 285, 345, 351, 358, 359, 364,
367-369, 371-373, 375-378, 380, 402-404, 408, 415, 420, 421, 423, 425-429, 432, 436,
438, 439, 444, 452, 453, 457, 459, 467, 469, 483, 486, 490, 491, 521, 551, 560, 561,
585,588, 598, 627, 667, 671-673, 675, 676, 697, 741, 744, 749
bkra shis sgang 299
bkra shis sgo mang 89, 132, 133, 358
bkra shis bstan'dzin 697
bkra shis dal "bar khab 182
bkra shis do 70.455
bkra shis do do che 70
bkra shis don grub 455
bkra shis bde chen 610
bkra shis dpal bzang 427
764



531
bkra shis phun tshogs gling 359, 648, 653
bkra shis dbang chen dyra 'dul 276
bkra shis dbang dus 169
bkra shis sman ri 29
bkra shis smin grol gling 458, 608, 611
bkra shis rtse 223
bkra shis tshul khrims 87
bkra shis tsho mo 744
bkra shis zla ba rgyal mtshan 621
bkra shis bzang po 385
bkra shis 'od 'bar 84, 167
bkra shis g-yung drung 397, 420, 524, 527,531, 586,605, 607, 611
bkra shis g-yung drung gling gi chags rim lo rgyus mdor bsdus sheldkar phreng ba
bkra shis rin chen 397
bkra shis bsam grub 455
bkra shis lhun po 368
rka gsar 351-353
rka gsar gsas khang gsang sngags bdud 'dul gling 352
rke bcag 300
rked thog 385
rkong yul se mo thang 228
rkyang phyag 253
ska rgya stong skor spyi khang 330
ska gsar 318
skang 'bum 705
skam khro rgyal grags pa 83
skam 'gyur dga' 82, 83
skam bstan 'dzin gtsug phud 83
skam tshe dbang 'gyur med 82
skam bsod nams g-yung drung 8 1
skar rgod 130, 141, 142
skar ma rgyal mtshan 138
skar ma mdo sde 330
skar yu 141
skal tsho 467
skal bzang skyabs 455
skal bzang mgrin rgyan 136
skal bzang rgya mtsho 81, 112, 274, 275, 285, 286, 318, 320, 422, 424, 597
skal bzang rgyal mtshan 147, 465, 606, 620
skal bzang rgyal bzang 617
skal bzang 'jam dpal 264
skal bzang nyi ma 33, 34, 78, 146, 374, 375, 460, 645, 648
skal bzang bstan pa 133, 432, 445, 468, 473, 484, 588
skal bzang bstan "dzin 96, 139, 273, 318
skal bzang bstan 'dzin grags pa 96
skal bzang bstan'dzin rgya mtsho 273, 318
765



skal bzang dar rgyas 454, 611, 613,622, 631
skal bzang nor bu 398, 503, 566
skal bzang rnam rgyal 648
skal bzang phun tshogs 32, 35, 37, 39, 41, 43, 369, 422, 427, 430, 437, 459
skal bzang blo gros 568
skal bzang dbang grags 136, 137, 152
skal bzang tshul khrims 648
skal bzang ye 277
skal bzang g-yung drung 148, 186, 209,568
skal bzang rin chen 653, 655
skal bzang shes rab 525, 578, 579
skal bzang shes rab rgya mtsho 525
skal bzang sangs rgyas bstan 'dzin 583
skal bzang lha mo 404
skal bzang Ihun grub 232
sku gdung khang 74
sku gdung nha khang 79, 87, 88
sku 'dun phun tshogs blo gros 111, 124
sku bla mthe bo 471
sku bla dbal drel 505
sku bla yong mgon 457
sku bla ri mchog 467
sku 'bum rig byed khang 36
sku zhabs nyi ma 507, 508
sku zhabs dam pa 503, 505
sku gsung blo gsar 202
sku gsum sgrub pa 453
sku gsum thugs thig 430
sku gsum phur sgrub 430, 432-435
ske bzhi 423, 424
skor dgu 506
skya skor 595
skya thu li 421
skya ye 299
skya yon 593
skya log 617
skyang klu gdong 615
skyang skor 585, 592
skyang mchu 575
skyang ston 318,585
skyang ston rgyal ba'i dbang bo lung rtogs skal bzang rgya mtsho 318
skyang sprul nam mkha'rgyal mtshan 319,583, 589, 595, 397,598,615, 644,649, 655
skyang sprul lung rtogs skal bzang rgya mtsho 274, 275, 285, 286, 320
skyang 'phags 167, 251, 259, 277, 582-584, 588-593, 596, 647-649
skyang 'phags nyi ma rgyal mtshan 251
skyang 'phags nyi ma 'od zer 588
766



skyang 'phags nam mkha' g-yung drung 596
skyang 'phags tshe dbang bstan rgyal 167
skyang 'phags 8-yung drung thos grol 593
skyang bla bstan 'dzin phun tshogs 582
skyang bla blo bzang rgya mtsho 617
skyang bla dbang ldan grags pa 583
skyang dbon bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan 615
skyang doon rin chen rgyal mtshan 583
skyang btsun g-yung drung bstan rgyal 608, 609, 611
skyang rtse nyi ma grags pa 589
skyang rtse 'phags pa skyabs 589
skyang rtse tshang 589
skyang tshang 253, 261, 263, 264, 582, 583, 585-587, 589, 590, 593, 596, 597, 599, 606,
609, 614-617, 631, 644, 649
skyang tshang rgya nag sprul sku skal bzang mkhas grub 583
skyang tshang phun tshogs dar rgyas gling 614
skyang tshang bla ma gtsug gshen 597
skyang tshang ma tri 616
skyang tshang g-yung drung gtsug rgyan 597
skyang za g-yu sgron 527, 611
skyang bza' yig tsis ma 277
skyab mgon bstan'dzin Thun grub 88
skyabs mgon 167, 482,530,533, 606, 613, 616, 630, 738
skyabs mgon sbyin pa rgyal mtshan 482
skyabs mgon zla ba rgyal mtshan 167, 530, 606, 613,616, 630, 738
skyi mthing nag mo 172
skyi mthing ya ma 172
skyi gdong 353
skyi tshal 746
skyid mkhar 34, 38
skyid khar ri zhing 34, 38
skyid mkhar i zhing dgon 38
skyid po bla ma'idus chen 39
skyid mu sman ri 44
skyid gzhong 38
skyil 'khor zhi sgrub 491
skye sgo 75, 328, 576, 680, 705, 711, 712
skye sgo gcod pa 328, 576, 705, 712
skye sgo gcod pa pod 712
skye sgo gcod pa yig nag can 705
skye sgo gcod pa'i mdo 705
skyes phreng gsol 'debs 138
skyes ri 289
skyobs 'byin 424, 433,435, 445
skyobs 'byin seng nag 424
bskang chen 345
767



bskang 'bum 170,738, 745
bskang gso 35, 76, 185, 187, 738
bskangs gso khang 124
bskal bzang grags pa 432
bskal bzang rgya mtsho 137
bskal bzang bstan rgyas 490
bskal bzang bstan 'dzin 378
bskal bzang dar rgyas 606
bskal bzang nor bu 397
bskal bzang blo gros rgya mtsho 528
bskal bzang gtsug phud 122
bskyed rdzogs lha gnyen shel gong 255
Kha
kha ska 595
kha 'khor 438, 441
khargan 593
kha sgang zhol ma 353
kha che 172
kha btags 147
kha thang 179
kha nang 257
kha pa 89, 249, 323,456
kha spungs 180
kha ba 126, 257,262, 26, 265, 364, 420
kha ba ston stan 503
kha ba lung 262, 420
kha ba lung dgon pa gong ma 262
kha ba lung dgon pa 'gab ma 262
kha ba lung ri 420
kha bo rtogs Idan shes rab phun tshogs 130
kha ba'i klong 257
kha dbugs 290
kha 'brog 459
kha rag khyung btsun 172
kha rag 'jam dpal blogsal rgyal mtshan 400
kha rag 'jam dbyangs blogsal rgyal mtshan 398
kha rag sdong brag 399
kha rag gnas kyi lo rgyus 396
kha rag bla ma 398, 400, 406
kha rag tshang 397, 398
kha rag Iha rgyal rtse mo 398
kha la g-yu gshog 172
kha lang 473
kha lung 188, 257,430, 438, 441
kha legs 'bum 717
768



kha lo 467
kha shu 523, 530
khang ri sgang 598
khang gsdf 366
kham chen 382
kham pa ge khod 82
kham be 380
khams brgyad 84, 750
khams chen 45, 117, 118, 144, 145, 152, 167, 183, 276, 430, 453,457,475, 486,523, 529,
551
khams chen nag phran ma 167
khams phyogs dkar mdzes khul gyi dgon sde so so'i lo rgyus 417, 667
khams gsum dbang 'dus 165
khis ri 262
khu khag 623
khu byug 164, 183
khu btsun g-vung drung khri od 119
khu tsho 746
khug mgo sgang 523
khug mgo rtsa 523
khe lam 249
kho nag 274
kho bo 133, 136, 567
kho bo tog Idan shes rab phun tshogs 133
kho bo rogs Idan shes rab phun tshogs 136
kho tsha 516
kho ri te 624
khog steng kha 267
khog sde kha 267
khong yul 519
khod po 400, 404, 464, 465, 467, 469, 472, 473,475, 481, 484, 643, 645
khod po skal bzang nyi ma 645
khod po khog 643
khod po snang Idan 400, 404
khod po blo gros thogs med 464, 465,467, 469, 472, 473,475, 481, 484
khod po 8-yung drung dar rgyas gling 645
khod spung 421,432, 439, 441-443, 445, 464, 468, 484, 747
khod spung mdo rgyud grags pa 432
khod spungs 421, 432, 439, 441-443, 445, 464, 468, 484, 747
khod spungs kun bzang 'od gsal 432
khod spungs skos yag pa 443
khod spungs gu ru 442
khod spungs sgrub gshen snang Idan 421
khod spungs dran pa 747
khod spungs blo gros thogs med 439, 441-443, 445
khod spungs blo gros thogs med kyi skyes rabs dang 'brel ba'i don gyi mnam thar gdung rabs
769



468, 484
khod spungs dbang ldan 464
khod rtsal hur min 151
khod rtse 647
khor bsam gtan tshul khrims 149
khos mgo rtsa 530
khos 'go 530
khyi khrud 125
khyung dkar 72, 104, 151, 167, 183, 184, 189, 281, 284, 297, 300, 524, 701, 707
khyung dkar bstan pa rgyal mtshan 104
khyung dkar bstan pa lhun grub 104
khyung dkar gdung pa lha bu 72
khyung dkar tshang ba 281, 284
khyung dkar yon tan 184
khyung dkar lha gnyan gvi bsang mchod 524
khyung khu 562
khyung khra 151
khyung khri thang 165
khyung khor smon lam thul khrims 426
khyung dga' 534
khyung dgon 436, 501, 562, 564, 568.569
khyung dgon gyi lo rgyus mdor bsdus 564
khyung rgod 151, 442, 464, 610
khyung sgom mu langs 164
khyung sgom g-yung drung 'od zer 137
khyung Inga ma 183
khyung chags 647
khyung chen yon tan rin chen 167
khyung mchu 575, 577
khyung mchog rgyal 151
khyung gter 'od zer gling pa 464, 469
khyung ston tshul khrims 'od zer 749
khyung ston tshul khrims legs pa 749
khyung thog la 'bar 164
khyung sder sngon mo 164
khyung nag klu rgyal 151
khyung nag mu khyung 151
khyung nag mu khyung rgyal 151
khyung nag tshul khrims phun tshogs 184, 186
khyung nag shes rab rgyal mtshan 151
khyung nag sa trig 151
khyung nag bsod nams g-yung drung 152
khyung po 33, 35, 72, 75, 77, 78, 84, 95, 114, 120, 124, 125, 137, 139, 141, 146, 151, 153,
154, 164-167, 179, 180, 182-184, 228, 280, 289, 330, 363, 378, 384, 387, 421, 425,
439, 469, 501, 575, 577, 608, 629, 698, 699, 701, 707-710, 715,732
khyung po kun bzang grags pa 153
770



Inde>
khyung po dkar po 701, 707-709
khyung po dkar ru 95
khyung po gyer chen zla med 84
khyung po rgyas reg khog 363
khyung po sgom nag 151
khyung po 'chi med g-yung drung 698
khyung po nyi ma rgyal mtshan 421, 469
khyung po stong rgyung 151
khyung po bstan rgyal grags pa 72,77
khyung po bstan pa dar rgyas 280, 289
khyung po nag ru 78
khyung po nang chen grags pa 77, 154, 439
khyung po mam rgyal 167
khyung po mam rgyal shes rab rgyal mtshan 710
khyung po dpon dge 137
khyung po bla rgan g-yung dga' 154
khyung po blo gros rgyal mtshan 167, 384
khyung po 'bun snang 77
khyung po 'bum rgyal grags pa 179
khyung po 'bum chen 180
khyung po sba nag bla brang 77
khyung po sbra nag 72
khyung po sman ri grags pa 77
khyung po rdzong 384
khyung po bzod ba rgyal mtshan 139
khyung po yon rin 183
khyung po g-yung drung rnam dag 153
khyung po g-yung dpal 154
khyung po rab rgyas 629
khyung po ser rtsa 709
khyung po a 'je 167
khyung po a bla grags pa 72, 77
khyung sprul 168, 177, 230, 738
khyung sprul "jigs med nam mkha'i rdo rje 240
khyung sprul tshe dbang 8-yung drung 168
khyung sprul g-yung drung phun tshogs 230
khyung 'phags khra bo 151
khyung 'phags khra mo 164
khyung bo 281, 284, 297, 300
khyung bo thang 281, 297
khyung bo thang smad pa 297
khyung dbus 164-166
khyung dbus shes rab rgyal mtshan 164, 165
khyung dbon rig 'dzin yon tan rnam rgyal 470
khyung mo 273-275, 281, 290, 300, 318, 329-336, 350, 351, 366, 529
khyung mo kun dga' rgyal mtshan 330
771



khyung mo sgrub pa mthar phyin 290
khyung mo stobs Idan dbang phyug 275, 335, 336
khyung mo stobs Idan dbang phyung 281, 334
khyung mo bla ma 334
khyung mo Iha khang 330
khyung mo lha sde 333
khyung dmar 210, 360, 442, 700
khyung dmar syrub skor 711
khyung btsun bsam gtan nyi ma 111
khyung rdzong 72,77
khyung rdzong rin chen 'barba 454
khyung zhig 500
khyung zhig ye rgyal ba 166
khyung zla sras can 138
khyung bza' ye shes mtsho rgyal 164
khyung yag 654
khyung g-yang 646
khyung rin chen dbang rgyal 152
khyung lung 166, 502, 558
khyung lung dgon 502
khyung lung dngul mkhar 73,240
khyung lung mam rgyal ha rtse ri khrod 501
khyung lung gshen bstan ram rgyal lha rtse gling 501
khyung shog 95
khyung ser151, 168, 183, 189
khyung ser smon lam bstan pa 104
khyung sras dge legs bstan sras 534
khyung sras bstan'dzin nyi ma 466, 470
khyung slob tshul khrims rgyal mtshan 139
khyung gsas bdud joms 442
khyung a dar 152
khyung a brla 151, 166
khyung a shaba rang grol 154
khyer ba 491
khra dge 202
khra dgon g-yung drung kun grags gling 208
khra rgan 208
khra ryan nyi yu 119
khra chags med bkra shis rgyal mtshan 208-210
khra tshang gu ru sgrol ma 404
khran kha 626
khram tshe dbang rgyal po 203
khri ka 251, 273, 275, 276, 281, 284, 300, 322, 327, 330, 343, 350, 353, 529
khri ka kun bzang rgyal mtshan 322, 329
khri ka kun bzang bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan 335
khri ka ba kun bzang bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan gyi ram thar 335, 667
772



khri dkar 72
khri skyang 251
khri skyong la kha'i dgon kun khyab bde chen gling 615
khri rgan 'jam dbyangs thub bstan rgya mtsho 285
khri rgyal 137, 144, 153, 582, 610
khri rgyal grags pa 591
khri rgyal grags bzang 582
khri rgyal rje chen 144, 153
khri cha 459
khri chen theg mchog ye shes 273, 274
khri brtan nor bu rtse 36,731, 733, 752
khri bde gung grags 77
khri 'du 481
khri rdo 178
khri pa 282, 283, 286, 435, 456, 466, 470, 472, 475, 495, 497, 499, 504, 508, 515, 522, 525,
528, 557, 558
khri pa 'jam dbyangs mkhyen rab rgya mtsho 521
khri ba kun bzang rgyal mtshan 273
khri ba theg mchog ye shes 274
khri dbang rab brtan 145
khri mo 516
khri smin 613,614
khri smon Iha rtse 88
khri gtsug rgyal ba 73, 87, 144, 185, 186, 188, 205, 218, 591
khri gtsug bstan'dzin 582, 751
khri gtsug g-yung drung 747
khri tsho 455
khri tsho sgang 457
khri tsho 'brug lha 457
khri langs stong bzhugs 130
khri srong Ide btsan 77,313, 358, 397, 420, 454, 469, 621
khrid yig dmar mo mdzub tshugs 254, 255
khro skyabs 45, 365, 401, 442, 445, 502, 556, 583
khro rgyal 74, 83, 313, 352, 481, 586
khro rgyal skyabs 747
khro rgyal gya drug 74
khro rgyal rtse 481
khro brgya 336
khro bcu brag 459
khro chu brag 459
khro chen 442
khro chen dgu 'pharma 183
khro sprul g-yung drung mthong grol 428
khro bo mgo mtshar rgyas pa 402
khro bo rgyal mtshan 84, 116, 117, 173, 359, 597, 617
khro bo rgyud drug 711
773



khro bo sgrub skor 711, 712
khro bo ngo mtshar rgyas pa 90, 125, 204, 361
khro bo dar 85
khro bo mam rgyal 750, 751
khro bo dbang chen 102, 116, 745
khro bo gtso mchog 117, 118, 121, 154, 155, 328
khro bo gtso mchog mkhagyings 182
khro bo tshe brtan 381
khro bo 'od zer 'khyil ba 114, 116
khro bo rol pa 399, 402
khro bo la 84
khro bo srung 85
khro bo gsang 'thus 'dur gyi skor sgrub skor 711
khro bo bsam grub 745
khro bla skal bzang rgya mtsho 81
khro tshang 84, 117, 122, 223, 358-361, 365, 375,443, 465, 469
khro tshang dar rgyas dgon 358
khro tshang 'brug lha 122, 223, 375
khro tshang yid bzhin dbang rgyal 361
khrom stod khams lung 397
khrom sprul g-yung drung mthong grol 155
khrom Ishang 131, 154, 155
khrom tshang bstan'dzin nor bu 155
khrom rdzong phun shogs gling 359
khrom sras bstan pa lhun grub 155
mkhan chung Drags nam 78, 147
mkhan chen 33, 121, 124, 133, 143, 359, 375, 529, 556,715
mkhan chen skal bzang bstan pa'i nyi ma 133
mkhan chen nyi ma bstan 'dzin 529
mkhan chen phun tshogs blogT0s 124
mkhan chen mu zi gsal bzang 121
mkhan chen sangs rgyas bstan'dzin 715
mkhan chen bsod nams rgyal mtshan 556
mkhan chen Ihun grub ye shes 359
mkhan drung ma dpal 'dzin 749
mkhan nag bla chung 81
mkhan po skal bzang 2-yung drung 209
mkhan po grags rgyal 747
mkhan po bstan pa 168
mkhan po bstan pa g-yung drung 731, 733, 738, 752
mkhan po bstan 'dzin nyi ma 466
mkhan po g-yung drung dbang rgyal 466
mkhan po lo thar 466
mkhan po bsod nams rgyal mtshan 715, 744
mkhan zur 'chi med 466
mkhan sangs rgyas tshe brtan 407
774



mkha' klong gsang mdos 118, 134, 168, 738
mkha' klong gsang ba'i mdos chen 116, 361
mkha' 'gying ram nag 481
mkha 'gro kye ma 'od mtsho 319
mkha 'gro klu yang sgong brgyad 84
mkha' 'gro bka'thang 402
mkha''gro skye ma 'od mtsho 107
mkha 'gro bde chen dbang mo 38
mkha''gro dbang mo 440
mkha' 'gro rtsargyud gsang chen 320
mkha' 'gro seng gdong ma 121, 147, 182
mkha' 'gro gsang gcod 276, 277, 282, 627,711
mkha''gro gsang good kyi dmigs skor 711
mkha''gro gsang gcod yid bzhin nor bu 276
mkha' 'gro gsang bcod 297
mkha''gro'i bka' thang 256
mkha' 'gro'i zhal lung 274
mkha'rgyal 72, 73, 75, 76, 82, 117, 135, 153, 166, 264, 275, 319, 346, 401, 426, 428, 429,
431, 472, 524, 527, 528, 531, 532, 583, 589, 595, 597, 598, 615, 644, 646, 649, 655,
707, 710, 712
mkha' spyod dbang mo 437, 438, 440
mkha' spyod g-yung drung dgra 'dul 619
mkha' dbyings lha mo 134
mkha' yag g-yung drung ye shes 95
mkha're 362
mkhar gong ma 290
mkhar sgang 616,617
mkhar sgo gong ma 297
mkhar sgo zhol ma 297
mkhar chag 473
mkhar steng 258
mkhar mthon po 489
mkhar mdo 647
mkhar nag 327, 333, 335, 385
mkhar nag grub chen 274,331
mkhar nag btsan gzhung gi phyag bzhes 331
mkhar nang 301
mkhar sna 78, 81, 148, 368, 700
mkhar sna bsam gtan gling 44
mkhar brag 433
mkhar sbe 433
mkhar ma 476
mkhar dmar bla brang 144, 145, 147
mkhar smad 598
mkhar rtse 345, 352
mkhar zhol 290
775



mkhar yag 617, 619,621, 622
mkhar yag nor bu dbang rgyal 629
mkhar yag s-yung drung kun khyabs 622
mkhar yag shes rab 622
mkhar lung 619
mkhas grub rgyal mtshan 42, 406
mkhas grub rgyal mtshan mchog legs 42
mkhas grub 'dul ba rgyal mtshan 489
mkhas grub nam mkha' bzang po 132
mkhas mchog Ihun grub 577
mkhas pa sman pa 672, 743
mkhas pa tshul khrims dpal chen 42
mkhas btsun kun bzang 577
mkhas btsun nam mkha 'od zer 137
mkhas btsun bon dbyings rdo rje 407
mkhas btsun bsam gtan nyi ma 112
mkhyen brtse ngag dbang blo gros 557
mkhyen brtse bstan pa 577
mkhyen brtse Ihun grub dpal bzang 482
'khor rgye 614
'khor chags 241
khor chen 125
"khor ba ngan song skye sgo gcod pa 680
'khor ba stong 'dren 533
khor tshang 588
'khor lo 89, 172, 185, 280, 380, 667
"khor lo bsgyur rgyal 284
*khor lo bde mchog 70
'khor lo brtsegs rdzong 567
'khyams skor 299
khyams tho spun gsum 297
'khyer yag 290
'khyog chu 318
'khrin las kun khyab 422
'khrungs gzhis 31, 32
khrungs sa 599
Ga
ga tha 189, 190
ga shel 190
ga lhug 83
gang kha 32
gangs kyi g-yu sgron 172
gangs dkar sha med 172
gangs rgyal 171, 177
gangs can ma 241
776



gangs chen dbang po 177
gangs gnyan rta sgo 102
gangs gnyan stag rtse 227
gangs sti se 240
gangs tshe ring 241
gangs ri spurgyal 156
gad ngas la 72
gad pa skya bo 280, 291, 292
gad pa stag mgo 650
gad pa gser gyi bya phibs 241
gad srang kha 267
gab pa 529
gar dbang rdo rje 490
gar dbang mam rgyal 184, 186, 188
gar ma gar shom spro 172
gu rgya 428
gu dar thog 430
gu drag 402, 430
gu ya 116, 497
gu ra ta kra 151
gu rib 672
guru gyam 240
gu ru drag po 187
gu ru drag dmar 185
guru mtshan brgyad 378
gu ru zhi drag 183
gu shri khan 203
gushri khan 76,664
gushri khan bstan 'dzin chos rgyal 76
gushri bstan'dzin chos rgyal 77
guru sidhi 526
gu sras 647
gug pa 218, 219
gung brgyud dngul gyi mtsho mo 241
gung sman yul sa 141
gung Ihag 144
gur khang 183
gur bza' dpal 'dzoms 72
ge khod sgrub skod dbal chu'i skor bcas pa
ge khod dbang rgyal 152
ge khod tshe ring 744, 745
ge khod rin chen rgyal mtshan 707, 709, 710
ge khod gsang drag 232
geta gergya 135
ge mo 82
ge sar 181, 399, 431
711
777



ge sar lha khang 358
go skyabs 509
go tog rtogs ldan 464
go bde 'phags pa 186
go tshang 589
go tshang spun dgu 589
gong skor 297
gong 'gra 744
gong rgyal 168, 426,429.459, 470
gong rgyal dgon gyi lo rgyus 428, 431
gong nyag la 29
Long thang 575
gong thog 427
gong ma 249, 262, 290, 291, 293, 297, 371, 529,530,592, 626, 644
gong lung 365
gong lung 8-yung drung mi 'gyurgling 415
gong shel brag dmar phug 441
gong shod 420, 423, 424
gong gsum 459
gon cha 505
gorgor mig 457
golok 531
gyang sngon 191
gyang ra 173, 175, 423
gyang ri zhol ma 293
gyang ru 281
gyad bzhi 499
gyam smyug lha khang 240
gyi ghir 139
gyi ba 249
gyi rong 257
gyim tsha ma chung 182, 277
gyim shod yang dben mthong grol 184, 187
gyim shod yang dben mthong grol ri khrod 187
gyer nam zur rtse 164
gyer mi nyi 'od 151
gyer bza' 371
gyer bza'ri khrod 371
gyer ru mtsho 141
grags sdis 176
grags pa rgyal mtshan 150, 177
grags pa chos 'phel 557
grags pa ram rgyal 117, 174
grags pa phun tshogs 556
grags pa dbang rgyal 590, 593
grags pa bzang po 578
778



grags pa ye shes 429
grags bu 595
grags dbang 106,583
grang 'dzi 610
gral mngon 588
gral ring 588
gri gum btsan po 469
gri chu 70
grib srib 519
gru zhig nam mkha' 'od zer 183
grub chen bkra shis rgyal mtshan 358
grub chen khyung rgod 442
grub chen brgyad cu 287
grub chen bstan pa 'brug grags 482
grub chen smon lam rgyal mtshan 114
grub brnyes tshe dbang 'od zer 359
grub thob nam mkha' hun grub 273
grub thob tshang pa 295
grub thob g-yung drung nyi ma 497
grub thob gshen rab rgyal 564
grub thob a stag kha barjes med 364
grub dbang nyi ma 331
grub dbang bstan'dzin rin chen 87, 112, 133,681, 717
grub dbang bstan 'dzin rin chen gyi mnam thar 711
grub dbang smon lam rgyal mtshan 139, 146
grub dbang g-yung drung bstan 'dzin 528
grub dbang shar rdza 124, 139
grub dbang shar rdza pa 124
grub sman mam bzhi 75
gro mgon klu brag pa 744
gro thang 595
gro mang 260
gro mo 34, 44
gro rtsi 647
grogs rdis nor skyong dpal Idan 171
grong mang 523, 530
grwa khag 630
grwa chung 595
grwa tshang 30, 121, 585, 591, 594, 597, 609, 615, 643
grwa sa 'og ma 253
gla ge 223
gla ro 620, 622
gla ro dgon gyi dkar chag 620
gla ro g-yung drung gling 620
gla ro g-yung drung dgon gyi dkar chag 620, 622
glang phu 29
779



glang rdzong 233
glang zhig 403
glang 'ong 465
glang rong 438, 441
glas rgyud 118
gling 'gu zi 208
gling rgya 281, 294
gling tshang 358, 378,741, 752
gling zhig rgyal ba bstan'dzin 596
gling zhig rgyal ba blo gros 582
gling zhig ram rgyal grags pa 596
gling zhig tshe dbang 8-yung drung 368
gling zhig shes rab g-yung drung 596
gling og 589, 590
gling ra khra rgan po 208
glo bo 671, 673, 674
glo bo chos tsong 671
glo bo smon thang 674
dga yeng 441
dgag dbye 125
dga'skor 290
dga' bde dpal ri 430
dga' 'degs 154
dga'Idan 148, 240, 337, 363, 368.456, 481, 590
dga' ldan dpal ri 459
dga' ldan phun tshogs gling 456
dga'Idan tshe dbang 240
dga' ba bkra shis 504, 505
dga' ba mdangs Idan 82
dga' mal 606, 607.613,618,623, 627-629, 631-633
dga' mal smon lam 629
dga' mal g-yung drung dar rgvas gling 628
dga' mal gshen bstan kun khyab bde chen gling 631
dga'rab rdzong 676
dga'ri 112, 113
dgar ba 272-274, 301
dgar ba g-yung drung rgyal mtshan 318
dgu skyang 251, 252, 259, 260, 584
dgu skyang nyi ma rgyal mtshan 259
dgu gtor 31, 35, 84. 90, 97, 106, 125, 140, 144, 145, 169, 174, 176, 210, 231, 233, 256,
276, 361, 365, 376, 382, 384, 398, 399, 402, 408, 416, 438, 440, 456, 467, 470, 483,
491, 523, 526, 530, 551, 576, 598, 616,618.621, 623, 629, 646,716, 733, 738
dgu na tshe bstan 455
dgu ba 589, 590
dgu smad 473
dgu rdza 465, 472, 474
780



dgu rdzab dgon 474
dgu gsum 123
dgung ru 430
dge bskos 30, 34, 106, 111, 115, 125, 134, 148, 156, 282, 319, 321, 324, 345, 364, 425, 426,
445, 508, 533, 547, 560, 618, 708
dge bsnyen 103, 117, 140, 256, 416,556, 607, 747, 748
dge bsnyen mkha' 'gro 748
dge bsnyen mi ra 416
dge bsnyen g-yung drung rtsal 607
dge bsnyen lha Inga 256
dge 'dun grags pa 149
dge 'dun rin chen 557
dge 'dun shes rab 608, 611
dge nang 366
dge spyod 255, 256, 287, 609, 733
dge sprul yid bzhin legs grub 368
dge dbang 154
dge bzang bon chung 155
dge bzang g-yung drung dbang rgyal 155
dge li 523, 526
dge lugs 40,77, 114, 137, 147, 153, 174, 203, 249, 250, 280, 294, 296, 298, 313, 322, 323,
329, 332, 337, 358, 374, 456,472, 545, 556, 557, 620, 732.737
dge lung 500, 676
dge legs rnam rgyal 481
dge legs tshul khrims 172
dge bshes khog 442, 445
dge bshes nyi ma dbang rgyal 731
dge bshes bstan pa g-yung drung 731
dge bshes bstan 'dzin phun tshogs 531, 532
dge bshes tsa 458,468, 474, 556
dge bshes tshul khrims bstan'dzin 731
dge bshes g-yung drung bstandzin 469
dge bshes g-yung drung mam rgyal 736
dge bshes gsang sngags grags pa 367
dge slong 81, 96, 149, 350, 483, 701-703, 708-710, 741
dge slong skal bzang bstan'dzin grags pa 96
dge slong dbang dga' 149
dge gsar 465
dgong thog 471
dgong rdzogs 416
dgongs rtse g-yung drung tshul khrims 495
dgongs mdzod ri khrod chen po 272
ngon chung dgon 381
dgon chen 112, 228, 229, 231, 358, 633
dgon chen bya mjal 229, 231
dgon mying 227,465
781



dgon sding 230
dgon nang 366, 619
dgon pa nang 626
dgon pa ra 526
dgon pa'i lo rgyus mdor bsdus 546, 548, 559, 562, 565, 567, 579, 624, 631, 645, 648, 650,
653, 655
dgon dpal Idan g-yung drung gling 472
dgon phug dgon pa 676, 693
dgon lung 531
dgon gsar 374,375, 465, 550
dgos 'byor 750
dgyes ri 169, 227, 230
dgyes ri dgon 187
dgra 'dul 147, 276, 289, 297, 509, 534, 579,587, 614, 617, 619
dgra 'dul bstan rgyal 132
dgra bla'i rgyal mo 77
dgra bla'i dpung stod 328
dgra lha khyung dgon 562, 568, 569
dgra lha khyung itse 564
dgra lha rgyal mo 149
dgra lha dpang stod 75
bgegs kyi gtso 69
bgres po'i 'bel gtam 733
mgar thar 137, 476
mgar rdo 569
mgal bu 504, 506
mgal bu sku zhabs 503
mgo che lcag 530
mgo rje 260, 261
mgo ti sgang 406
mgo rtse 261
mgon rgya 273, 318
mgon po 70, 184, 421, 443, 454, 460,466, 576, 587, 590, 615,748
mgon po skyabs 615
mgon po rdo rje 460
mgon po mam rgyal 421
mgon po phug 70
mgon lo 460
mgon shul 523, 530
mgon lha 119, 122, 123
'ga'rgyal rin chen spungs 170
'ga' yeng 438
'gi ru 500
'gis nang 188
'gu nge 502
'gu ya 497
782



'go mgon shes rab dgongs rgyal 472
gyu chen Idong khram 172
'gyur skor 523
'gyur med "od ma tshal 172
gram 102, 105, 569
'gro mgon 73, 133, 174, 185, 374, 472, 481, 489, 492, 675, 744
'gro mgon klong rol dbang rgyal 481
'gro mgon rgyal ba tshul khrims 481
gro mgon bstan pa 'brug grags 174
'gro mgon bdud rtsi rgyal mtshan 489
'gro mgon 'phags pa 374
'gro mgon dbra ston chen mo 374
'gro mgon tshe dbang 'gyur med 472
'gro mgong-yung drung bdud 'dul gling 489, 492
'gro mgong-yung drung tshul khrims 472
'gro mgong-yor med 489
'gro mgon shes rab g-yung drung 73, 133
'gro mgron shes rab g-yung drung 81
'gro 'dul gling pa 184, 186, 363, 741
'gro 'dren a dkar 359
'gro dpal bde chen 'gyur med gling 101
rga lo gzim phug 70
rgan gya'i a myes dga' bo 276
rgan rgya 251, 299, 318, 333, 529
rgu ba 655
rgu rab 588
rgu ru 399
rgo dung 438, 441
rgod kyi dar rgyas bcu gsum 119
rgod po 255, 258, 259
rgya khag 630
rgya mkhar'go 534
rgya rgod 102, 103
rgya sgo 178
rgya stag khro bo 86
rgya mda' ri nang 452
rgya rdung 289
rgya nag sprul sku mal 'byor ba 583
rgya po rin chen 'od zer rgyal mtshan 183
rgya bye 467
rgya myi ya ru 251
rgya tsha spun drug 164
rgya mtsho nor bu 168
rgya mtsho dpal 280, 290, 291
rgya rdzong 367
rgya 'obs 274-276, 528, 530,531
783



rgya 'obs bstan pa rab rgyas 275, 530
rgya 'obs bstandzin dbang rgyal 528, 531
rgya yag 564
rgya ye gnam go byams 299
gya ra 183, 353
rgya ra bsam gtan rgyal mtshan 183
rgya lo'i smon lam 327
rgyab klu gong ma 249
rgyab klu 'og ma 249
rgyal kun gragsgling gi byung ba brjod pa dbyar mga'i sgra dbyangs 593
gyal skyid grags pa 72
rgyal mkhar 614
rgyal chu 110, 112, 115, 119
rgyal chen nyi pang sad 150
rgyal chen sde bzhi 75, 121
rgyal chen shel khrab 150, 185
rgyal chen shel khrab 'bar ba 150
rgyal mchog 117,379
rgyal mchog nyi ma 117
rgyal ston Iding dgu 118
rgyal bstan phun tshogs gling 527, 531
rgyal po kong gnyan rgyal 232
rgyal po nyi pang sad 77, 747
rgyal po shel Khur 90
rgyal po shel khrab can 156
ngyal po shel khrabs 79
rgyal sprul 499
rgyal 'phen 614
rgyal 'phel 655
rgyal ba bkra shis 425, 426,625
rgyal ba rgya mtsho 79, 89, 123, 132, 136, 140, 147, 152, 182, 183, 185, 186, 188, 256,
276, 287, 328, 370, 590, 615
rgyal ba mnyam med pa 112, 113
rgyal ba bstan'dzin 137, 582, 596, 618
rgyal ba don grub 167
rgyal ba 'dus pa 81, 88, 135, 144, 148, 155, 345, 423,591
rgyal ba blo gros 30. 230, 277, 582
Igyal ba sman riba 116
rgyal ba gtsug phud 230, 232, 482, 489.490, 700
rgyal ba rtsa mkhyen pa 426,427
rgyal ba tshul khrims 117, 137-139, 174, 273, 274, 288, 332, 481, 482, 490
rgyal ba tshul khrims bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan 274
rgyal ba g-yung drung 204, 401
rgyal ba g-yung drung phun tshogs 583, 586,587
rgyal ba rin chen 443,618
rgyal ba shes rab 131, 557
784



rgyal ba bsam gtan 577
rgyal dbang 87, 126, 137, 146, 209,277
rgyal mo mgul chu 215-219, 222
rgyal mo rnam bzhi 74
rgyal mo dmu rdo 442, 445, 500
rgyal myi g-yung drung dmu ri 267
rgyal btsan 607
rgyal rtse 368, 398
rgyal tshab bstan'dzin dbang rgyal 87
rgyal tshab blo gros rgya mtsho 139, 421
rgyal tshab 8-yung drung rgyal mtshan 148
rgyal tshab rin chen rgyal mtshan 29
rgyal tshab thun grub 'od zer 87
rgyal mtshan bde ba 102
rgyal mtshan nor bu 154
rgyal mtshan po 143
rgyal mtshandpal bzang 373, 582, 667
rgyal mtshan rin chen 698, 699, 746
rgyal mtsho dpal 292
rgyal zhing 425-427, 429
rgyal zhing dgon gyi lo rgyus 426
rgyal zhing 'brug grags 425 426
rgyal bza' klong yang 102
ngyal 'obs bstan 'dzin dbang rgyal 331
rgyal yum byams ma 112
rgyali 121
rgyal rong 29. 33, 82, 139, 145, 174, 183, 186, 189, 332, 350, 363, 364, 401, 442, 443, 445,
454-456,458,468, 471, 472, 474, 481, 500, 519,529, 545, 556-559, 583, 608, 643,
661
rgyal rong dge bshes 557
rgyal rong bla ma 189
rgyal rong g-yung drung ye shes 454-456
rgyal shod 111, 114, 116, 119-123, 505
rgyal shod stag pa tshal 119
rgyal gshen ya ngal gdan sa bsam gtan gling dgon 698
rgyal sras phun tshogs rnam rgyal 209
rgyu ne bstan'dzin Ihun grub 149
rgyu bu gdong 626
rgyud 'dzin mam mkhyen rang grol 359
rgye le 564
sga phrug 593
sgang skor 295
sgang 'bur 496
sgang ri kha 253
sgang ru 95, 131, 138, 141, 178
sgang ru dgon dar rgyas 178
785



589
sgang rusgra rgyal 141
sgang ru bstan pa kun khyab 138
syang ru byang ma 141
sgang leb 261
sgang gsum rong drug 249
sgar khang 188
sgar ba 334, 335
sgar ba lha khang 335
sgar gtsang po 240
sgar rdzong 240
sgur skyang 589, 590, 593,615, 644, 649
sgur mgo 257
sgur ba 589, 593
sgur ba skyang tshang 589
sgur ba skyang tshang dgon rnam rgyal kun grags gling
sge bshes khog 364
sger rtse rdzong 101
sgo rgyal lha bon thod dkar 83
sgo ston nyi ma rgyal mtshan 147
sgo thugs rje nyi ma 150
sgo dwags khri ba 750
sgo rigs rgyal mtshan 'od zer 183
sgo rigs ye shes kun 'byung 148
sgo a lod shig gzan 83
sgong ru 154
sgon stag nang 596
sgom grwa 187, 608, 731-733
sgom chen tshe dbang g-yung drung 482
sgom chen g-yung drung rgyal mtshan 272
sgom pa 534
sgom phug 671,677, 679
sgom phug dgon pa 671,677, 679
sgyes sum byams pa tshul khrims 139
sgy0g chen solong Ta 171
sgra rgyal 141
sgra tog g-yung drung 'gyur med 626
sgra dpal 607, 620, 633, 666
sgra bla dpa' stod 150
sgra btsun ye blo 628
sgrib sbyang 408
sgrib sbyong mun sel sgron ma 125
sgrub khang khri rgyal 144
sgrub pa mthar phyin 290, 331
sgrub lung 595
sgrub gshen snang ldan 421,442, 464
sgre bo stod 431
786



sgre bo this smad 431
sgre bo smad 431, 432
sgro ra pad ma 'byung gnas 215
sgrol dkar 144
sgrol ma 70, 75, 97, 106, 360,363, 404, 445
sgrol ma phug 70
brgya 'dres 503
Nga
nga kyab 564
nga 'dra ma 105, 185
ngag dbang rgya mtsho 565
ngag dbang bstan 'dzing rgya mtsho 114
ngag dbang bstan 'dzin 556, 591
ngag dbang dpal Idan 557
ngag dbang blo gros phyogs las mam rgyal 525
ngag dbang bzang po 557
ngag dbang hun grub 557
ngang chu 70
ngang rizong 187, 190
ngang rab 598, 599
ngàn song dong sprugs 456, 745, 747
ngan song sbyong ba'i gzungs 45
ngas pa 181
nges sa 257
ngo ke 619
ngo nya 476
ngo stod 654
ngo de 619
ngo mo 281, 284, 292, 293
ngo dmar lha btsan 107
ngo mtshar rgyas pa 90, 118, 125, 204
ngo mtshar phun tshogs gling 115
ngo we 624
ngo zhu bru tshang 397
ngo zhu tshul khrims rgyal mtshan 397
ngos blang 744
ngos blang rgyal mtshan 'bum 744
dngul kho 114, 115
dngul kho dgon g-yung drung dar rgyas gling 114
dngul kho dar rgyal gling 115
dngul phug 188
dngul ba 260
dngos grub bstan'dzin 454
dngos grub tshogs pa 264
mnga'ris 98, 101, 103, 137, 208, 240, 241, 253,673, 674, 737
787



mnga' ris mtsho chen rdzong 103
mnga' ris bsod nams rgyal mtshan 137
mga skyes 290
mga khul gyi dgon pa'i lo rgyus 559, 570, 648
mga khul mga bardzong gi gdong li dgon gyi lo rgyus mdor bsdus 526
mga khul zung chu rdzong gi bya dur dga' smin (mal) dgon pa'i lo rgyus mdor bsdus 631
mga khul zung chu rdzong gi gser len dgon pa'i lo ryyus mdor bsdus 624
mga khog 252, 257, 331, 345, 368, 426, 443, 521, 524, 527, 547, 548, 557, 569, 576, 577,
579, 605, 606, 611-613, 629
mga sgra khang 252
mga mga 432
mga chu 524, 532
rnga chen mo 75
mga pa 445, 500,531, 567, 570
rnga ba 251, 273, 521, 524, 526, 527, 531, 532, 534, 545, 546,548, 556, 559, 562, 564,
567, 575, 577, 579,582, 605, 643, 645, 650, 660, 666, 667
rnga ba khul gyi dgon pa'i lo rgyus 526,534, 546,548, 559, 562, 567, 650, 667
Inga ba khul hung yon rdzong gi tsha lung dgon pa'i lo rgyus Indor bsdus 579
rnga ba rdzong gi rtogs Idan dgon pa'i lo rgyus S24
mga ba'i rtogs ldan tshul khrims ye shes 273
mnga yab 436,439
Inga'i kha 276
mngu rdzong 165
mngul chu 166, 169, 173, 215-219, 222
Ingo tshang 295
Inga mchod 124, 125, 133, 576
Inga stag bde chen gling 507
Inga stod 177
Inga rig shes bya'i dga' tshal gling 522
Inga shog 507
sngags rgyun 125
sngags rgyun mar chen 125
Singags chung 443
sngags 'chang bkra shis rgyal mtshan 155
sngags sde byang chub gling 464
sngags pa 275.475, 575, 692, 695-698, 714, 744
sngags bon shes rab blo gros 274
sngang zhig bkra shis g-yung drung gling gi gdan rabs 524
sngun 'dus 473
sngo rgya tshang 328
sngo sngo 257
brgan bsang chen mo 35
Ca
cang mkhar spo sbyin pa rgyal mtshan 421
ci nges nang 257
788



citi 473
ci ru 509
Có za bon mũ 744
cog tse 442, 445, 556
cog tshang 598
cog lo 532, 534
cog lo dgon gyi lo ryyus mdor bsdus 534
cog lo mam rgyal bsam gtan nor bu gling 532
cong zhi phug pa 70
congro 595
cone 249, 253, 258, 261, 318
co'u 227
gcan tsha 313, 315
gcan lha mig dgu 149
gcal phrug 610
gcas bcu 354
gcig yon 216
gcod pa 328, 379, 381, 423, 576, 705, 712
gcod pa smon lam 381
bca'rdo lo 507
bco Inga mchod pa 133
Icags Tkang 473
Icags thar rgyal 353
lcags mdud 431,432, 442, 527, 529,605-607, 611,612, 618
Icags mdud bkra shis g-yung drung gling 527, 607
Icags mdud bkra shis g.yung drung gling gidkar chag me tog tshom 'phreng
lcags mdud skal bzang rgyal mtshan 606
Icags mdud dgon 605
Icags mdud dngul sku 605
lcags mdud nyi ma bstan 'dzin 618
lcags mdud 'brug mo rdzong 442
lcags mdud zla ba rgyal mtsha 606, 607
Icags mdud zla ba rgyal mtshan 606, 607
Icags mdud shes rab rgyal mtshan 431, 432
Icags phyung 595
lcags tsha tshul khrims bstan dbang 139
Icags zam 144
Icags la 556
Icang 'jug dbal gsas thar 365
Icang smad 130, 141, 610
Icang lung 375,404, 406, 407
Icang lung dgon 407
Icang lung g-yung drung mthong grol gling 406
Icang lo sna 472
Icang log sna 465, 468
Icang gsas dus log 652
607
789



Icam mo lam lha 149
Icam sras dom mgo 647
lce me thub 232
Ice tsha mkhar bu 203, 469
Icog lha tshal rtse 172
cha 'go 523
cha bo 530
cha g-yog 299
chag sgo 257
chags med bya bral 528
chags ri 110.260.584
chad lung thang 284
chab cha 350-353, 529
chab mdo 76, 78-80, 107, 130, 164, 191, 202, 203, 205, 208, 222
chab mdo dgon 76
chab mdo rtogs ldan 78
cham mda 136
chamdo 32, 39, 457, 459
chas ra 258, 259
chis kyi rin chen bcu gsum 121
chu dkar 260, 655
chu kha ra 530
chu kha ru 579
chu khong 284, 289, 346, 575
chu 'khyil 610, 617.630
chu 'khyil brag dgon 630
chu sgan 382
chu cam 131
chu chen 500, 556, 558, 559, 562, 564, 565, 567, 568, 570.661
chu gter rdzong 251
chu mdo 609
chu na ma 175
chu nag 249, 590
chu nang 430
chu nub 329,335
chu phyar 408
chu ma 318
chu mig 442, 445, 468,469, 471, 704, 710
chu tshal shog 598
chu gzhung 188
chu bza' rlung sbyor 81
chu ring 452
chu lung 141, 622, 635
chu lung tshur ta 635
chu shur 233
chu shod 438, 441
790



87
che mchog dran pa drag po 183-185
che g-yag 614
ches rje rgyal ba tshul khrims 273
cho ga bcu gnyis 79, 80, 87, 89, 97, 124, 125, 169, 185, 256, 287,368
cho mchos 522
cho mchog drang srong gnyan po 523
cho ba 647
cho 'dzi doon po 625
chos 'khor 415, 416
chos rgyal sde dge'i mdun skor 363
chos rgyal bsod nams dar rgyas 274
chos rje bstan pa 'od zer 275
chos rje tshul khrims 'od zer 274
chos rje tshul khrims Ihun 'grub 274
chos bstan 455
chos 'bum 137
chos 'byor rgyal ba 263
chos mtsho 400, 404
mchu dmar blo bzang rgya mtsho 296
mehog skyid 530
mchog syur grub dbang bstan'dzin rin chen nam mkha' bde chen snying po
mchog grub dpal bzang 594, 651
mchog dga' 407
mchog dge 423, 424, 442, 443
mchog sprul khro bo rgyal mtshan 359
mchog gsum 661
mchong gsum la khang 661
mchod gtor bdud rtsi chu rgyun361
mchod pa stong mchod 255
mchod pa stong mtshan 551, 623, 649, 651
mchod rdza 595
'chi med grags pa 457
'chi med grub dbang 458
'chi med rgyal mtshan 404, 407
'chi med dran pa 84
'chi med bdud 'dul gling pa 363
chi med bdud 'dul gling ba 363
'chi med nam rgyal 490
'chi med blogsal 397
'chi med dbang phyung 474
*chi med gtsug phud 182, 186
'chi med tshe dbang 397
'chi med zla ba yid bzhin rgya mtsho 368
'chi med zla ba ye shes 368
*chi med g-yung drung 168, 397, 698
*chi med rig 'dzin 177
791



Ja
ja rasgang 671
ja lung 424
jag pa 154
jam pa 583
jo lcam byang chub sems ma 744
jo rje 'brom gsum 456
jo bo nga 'gro 188
jo bo rje 456
jo mo mchod pa 681
jo mo g-yu rtse 171
jo sras 443
jag rgyal smug po 169
jang 172, 229
jam dpal rdo rje 575, 577
'jam dpal blo gros 398
jam dbyang 404
'jam dbyang mkhyen brtse 404
jam dbyangs khang 502
'jam dbyangs mkhyen brtse dbang po 409
jam dbyangs sbyin pa 557
'jam dbyangs smon lam 557
jam dbyangs brtson 'grus 531, 532
'jam dbyangs bzhed pa 287
jam dbyangs yar 'phel 557
jigs med 74, 240, 274, 275, 403.406, 408, 666, 738
jigs med skal bzang rgya mtsho 274
jigs med gling pa 408
*ju skor 530
'ju ba 626
jed spang lung 105
jo "ju 222
'jo mda' rdzong 191, 202, 205
rji ngo 502
rje tsong kha pa 456
rje btsun ingon po 443
rje btsun byang pa khro tshang 'brug Iha 122
rje lung 499
rjes ri 398, 399
rjo bo 491
Tjang shod 191
ljong phu 191
Nya
nya mgor 228
nya gug 374
792



nya rgyu 473
nya ngo tshul khrims 499
nya tshogs 376
nya mtsho 465
nya zi 430
nya len bla ma 263
nyag sked tshang 421
nyag ga 294
nyag chu 420, 481, 485, 489
nyag nyi 598
nyag gter gsang sngags gling pa 84, 138, 139, 184,404
nyag stod stong Idan mgon po 421
nyag bla pad ma bdud 'dul 424
nyag ra 591, 592
nyag rong 359, 364, 372, 375, 378, 420, 421, 424, 425, 428, 431, 434,436, 439, 441-443,
467, 468, 486, 576
nyag rong bkra shis dge legs 378
nyag shod 430
nyang 123, 226, 227, 229, 232, 647
nyang tan 647
nyang po lha gsol 227
nyang Iha btsan drug 227, 232
nyan sgom rin chen rgyal mtshan 209
nyams mgur 274
nyams rtogs tshad 'phel dga' bde 359
nyi grags 76, 404
nyi pang sad 77, 150, 185, 747
nyi dpal bzang po 131
nyi phug sgrub208
nyi dbang 72
nyi 'bum sprul sku 133
nyi ma grags pa 174, 209, 379, 429,519, 560, 589, 741
nyi ma rgyal po 748
nyi ma rgyal mtshan 36, 83, 107, 114, 133, 147, 150, 169, 184, 229, 251, 259, 331, 359,
401, 421, 436, 439, 455, 465, 469, 471, 497,516, 597, 612, 633,699, 745, 746
nyi ma 'jig rten 153
nyi ma bstan rgyal 174
nyi ma bstan'dzin 30, 33, 81, 83, 145, 152, 257, 361, 484, 529, 549, 568.578, 583, 612, 618
nyi ma phug 227
nyi ma dbang rgyal 30, 82, 147, 168, 560, 731
nyi ma dbang ldan 443, 464, 499
nyi ma 'bum 132, 133, 139, 590, 622, 624
nyi ma 'brug grags 165, 166
nyi ma tshe brtan 697
nyi ma 'dzin 521, 527, 577, 605, 611
nyi ma rdzong 97, 98, 101, 103, 107
793



nyi ma 'od zer 169,588,648, 713,714
nyi ma rig 'dzin 618, 620
nyi ma legs chen 155
nyi ma Ihun grub 140
nyi ma'i rgyal po 150, 400, 404
nyi zla tshe dbang 124, 126
nyi ong 610
nyi la chos dbyangs 743
nyili 381, 404
nyi li bo legs 404
nyi lung 'gram 105
nyi shar 586,706, 707, 709
nying khri 223, 224, 226, 228, 233
nyin ka 589, 590
nyin skor 301
nyin ga'i kha 265
nyin ngo 249, 267
nyin pa 249, 257
nyin la kha 267
nyin lung kha 257
nyin srib 257, 264
nye kho 654
nye mo 42
nye tsi 626
nyos zhing 584, 586-588
gnya tshang 291
gnyag chos nyid rdo rje 497, 500, 503, 507, 509
gnyag mo dngos grub 744
gnyags chos nyid rdo rje 495,496, 498, 505
gnyan gyi rgyal bo ge ne 'brug rtse'i dgos 'dod kun "byung 624
gnyan chen sgrung Iha rgad po 652
gnyan chen thang Iha 69-71, 103
gnyan chen pe tisstag mgo 647
gnyan chen bla ma snang rtse 647
gnyan chen wara 72
gnyan chen zhwa smug 652
gnyan rje gong sngon 171
gnyan po g-yu rtse 531
gnyan rtsa 654
gnyan bza' 266
gnyan yul 345, 618-620
gnyan yul dgon pa gshen bstan g-yung drung nor bu dar rgyas gling gi dkar chag 620
gnyan yul tsho bdun 619
gnya'khri btsan po 76, 102, 227, 228, 672
gnya' mo bkra shis 743
gnya' gshen gtsug phud 151
794



mnyam skyid 396
mnyam med chen po 123, 186,587
mnyam med bla sgrub 533, 547
mnyam med tshul khrims grags pa 87
mnyam med tshul khrims dbang grags 88.89
mnyam med tshul khrims dbang rgyal grags pa 88
mnyam med shes rab rgyal mtshan 29, 31, 32, 35, 39, 45, 73, 75, 80, 88, 110, 122, 140,
152, 155, 169, 173, 174, 216, 217, 219, 222, 223, 230-232, 255, 276, 287, 320, 351,
369, 374, 376, 378, 380, 398, 399, 416, 423, 442, 459, 467, 483, 486.491, 496, 497,
499, 529, 533, 561, 563, 566, 584, 585, 595, 598, 606, 609, 613, 616, 625, 629, 632,
646, 651, 654, 681,693,716, 732, 737
myi 'bur 615
mying ma pa 35, 266, 274, 280, 294, 298,329, 358, 396, 408, 424, 431,432, 443, 576
snya gad 469, 471
snya chen bla ma 469, 471
snya chen li shu stag ring 469, 471
snya mo kun skyid 746
snyan rgyud 184, 374,672, 673
snyan rgyud dpal bar stag slag 184
snyan brgyud zhi khro dgongs 'dus 183
snyam med shes rab royal mtshan 530
snyi khog 452
snying nge 333
snying rje bstan'dzin 168
snying sangs rgyal 329
snye mo rdzong 233
snye ri 473
snye rong 71, 78, 81, 83, 85,90
snye rong rdzong 71, 78, 81, 85, 90
bsnyen bsnyung 125
Ta
ta khug ta pa 607
ta rdo ko 548, 549
tang khu 564
tang be 644
tar grong 204
ti tri su 561, 606, 613,618,623, 632, 649
ti mi ri thang ka 676
ti se 70, 73, 84, 101, 103, 131, 146, 170, 229, 241
ting nang 377
til mgo 408
tis 'dra 385
tis bru 424
tu phyag phyogs las mam rgyal 499
te'u jo 621
795



to shes 273, 275, 318-324
tri bo bsod nams rgyal mtshan 139
tre ston rgyal mtshan dpal 40
tre ston sgo 707
tre ston rtog rgyal 707
tre ston nam mkha' rgyal mtshan 707,712
tre ston nam mkha'rgyal mtshan gyi rnam thar 712
tre ston 'bru 706
tre ston gtsug phud rgyal mtshan 707
tre ston tshe dbang tshul khrims 695, 700, 707, 710, 714
tre ston srid rgyal bzang po 714
tre ston bsod nams 'gyur med 455
tre ston bsod nams g-yung drung 700
tre bo bsod nams rgyal mtshan 139
tre hor 443, 445, 454, 455, 457
gtam stod 178, 179
gter sgrub 336
gter sgrom kha 167
gter chen bde gling pa 367
gter chen Ishe dbang grags pa 403, 438
gter chen tshe dbang 'gyur med 345
gter ston bde chen gling pa 153, 167
gter ston nam mkha' khri khyung 146
gter ston tshang drag 402
gter ston tshe dbang gragspa 133
gter ston tshe dbang 'gyur med 421,567
gter ston 8-yung drung grags pa 122, 146, 154
gter ston gsang sngags gling pa 378
gter yul kha 267
gter ti 255.265
gter lung 406
gter lhung 406
gter hung Icang lung 406
gio khog 454-456
gto sgang s-yung drung gling 454
gto nag 712
gto lung yang dben dpal dgon 454, 455
gto srung 592
gtor bzlog chen mo 287
rta khra'i gzhung 272
rta mgrin 187.232, 404
rta mgrin ga'u dmar nag 187
rta mgrin mtsho 404
rta rgyas rdzong 182
rta rgyugs ma 183
rta sgo 83, 101-107, 171
796



rta sgo gdong dmar Tha btsan gyi phug pa 107
rta sgo gtsang po 104, 107
rta sgo rdzu 'phrul phug 107
rta sgo ser zhig 104
ita nga 630
rta nag 174
rta ba 483
rta dbye 444
rta tshag ho thog thu 137
rta 'shel dgon 187
rta ra dri ri 590
rta ro 644
rta shod 154, 186, 188
rta shod dkyil 'khor thang 186
rta shod bu mo pad ma mtsho 154
rtag skyong 591, 592
rtag gzigs 172, 226, 743
rtag gzigs ga sho nor gyl gling 172
rtag gzigs 'ol mo lung ring 226
rtags 'jug 561
rta'u 445, 464, 468, 469, 472, 474, 502
rting ngu 84, 143, 145
rting g-ye kha 267
rtul "dre rtogs Idan 464
rten rgyal 295
rten bya 'phur ma 154
rtogs Idan dkon mchog 275, 523
rtogs Idan bkra shis rgyal mtshan 421
rtogs Idan rgyal ba dbang Idan 524.534
rtogs Idan rgyal ba gtsug phud 482
rtogs Idan nges don mthong ba rang grol 523
rtogs Idan chung ba 359
rtogs Idan 'jam dbyangs mkhyen rab rgya mtsho 523
rtogs Idan bstan pa rgyal mtshan 750
rtogs Idan bstan pa tshul khrims 615
rtogs Idan bstan 'dzin 203, 378, 563, 615
Ttogs Idan bstan "dzin phun tshogs 563
rtogs Idan bstan 'dzin blo gros 378
rtogs Idan theg mchog bstan pa'i nyi ma 523
rtogs Idan dpal gshen bstan smin grol bkra shis g-yas su "khyil ba'i gling 521
Togs loan phun tshogs od zer 615
rtogs Idan dben gnas Thun grub 'od gsal g-yung drung gling 521
rtogs Idan dbon po 744
rtogs Idan mi pham mam rgyal 378
rtogs Idan smin grol bkra shis g-yas su 'khyil ba'i gling 521
rtogs Idan tshul khrims dga' ba 142
797



275,523
rogs ldan tshul khrims bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan
rtogs Idan zla ba rgyal mtshan 378
rtogs Idan bzod pa rgyal mtshan 523
rtogs Idan ye shes bstan 'dzin 359
rtogs Idan yon tan rgya mtsho 523
Itogs Idan g-yung drung bstan'dzin 615
rtogs Idang-yung drung tshul khrims 521
rtogs Idan rag shu 148
rtogs Idan sangs rgyas 465
rtogs Idan bsam gtan ye shes 359
rtogs Idan bsod nams phun tshogs 523, 579
ltag kha 297
Itag ga kha 266
Itag tsha 219
Itag srib 249
Itung bshags lha 'khor 146
Itong phrug 644
stag skyabs 154
stag skyong 591, 643
stag gi gad mgo 585
stag ga'i rgyal mo byams 284
stag gru kha 29, 33
stag mgo gdong 400
stag mgo a mang sgrol ma 404
stag sgang 250, 257
stag sgra dun gtsug 151. 164
stag dngos shes rab g-yung drung 556
stag chen 588
stag thar rgyal 343, 354
stag thus bon rgan 171
stag thus bon mtshan 171
stag pa 119, 164
stag dpung 260
stag bro sa 227, 228
stag dbang 176
stag dbra nam mkhal od zer 455
stag 'ban 593
stag rtsa 530
stag rtsa rgyal mtshan 173
stag rtse 227, 230, 231, 233, 253, 519, 534, 672
stag itse ostan pa dge grags 149
stag rtse byi ri 672
stag rtse me mchod 233
stag rtse g-yung drung gling 231
stag rtse ri khrod 253
stag tsha 523, 577, 582, 586
798



stag tsha kun grol 254, 257
stag tsha dgon 582
stag zhig rin chen dbang Idan 114
stag zhig rin dbang 114, 115
stag gzhi 115, 202
stag gzhi bka bo rgyal 203
stag gzhi tshul khrims 115
stag gzig 331
stag gzig zhing bkod 287
stag ra 249, 260, 583, 590-592
stag ra gong ma 592
stag ra chu dkar 260
stag ri gnyan gzigs 481
stag ri snya nang 253
stag la skyabs 569
stag la skyes 164
stag la sgrub skor 712
stag la sgrub mchod 386
stag la rje 621
stag la spu gri dmar nag 124
stag la dbang rgyal 106
stag la me "bar 74, 79, 89, 90, 123, 133, 135, 137, 140, 152, 176, 180, 202, 204, 205, 210,
216, 218, 222, 231-233, 680, 705
stag la me 'bar spu gri dmar po 680
stag la tshogs stong 125
stag lung 294, 459, 577, 579
stag lung mkha''gro 96
stag lung sgrol sprul chos sgrol 96
stag lung chung ba 294
stag lung rnam rgyal bsam gtan gling 577
stag lung mam rgyal bsam gtan gling gibstan 'byung bkra shis bde legs kun 'byung 579
stag le 595
stag lo kha yan 171
stag la'i sgrub skor 711
stag la'i sgrub chen 345
stag la'i mga 'cham 80, 466, 483
stag shar sgang 297
stag gsas 420, 425
stag gsum 507, 509, 562
stag Iha 558, 750
stag Iha skyabs 557
stag Iha bris ma 705
stag a 'bum 297
stang chen dmu tsha gyer mod 117
steng ka 249, 250, 257, 264, 584
steng chen 71, 95, 157, 164-169, 173-181, 189-191, 215, 337, 350, 359, 370, 372-380, 382,
799



430.452
steng chen dgon 164, 337, 374, 377
steng chen rdzong 157, 164, 173, 176-181, 189-191, 215
stogs Idan nam mkharin chen 183
stong skor 330, 333, 334, 343, 350, 353, 620
stong rgyung 35, 73, 89, 116, 151, 164, 230, 345, 745
stong rgyung brngan chen mo 345
stong rgyung brngan bsang 89
stong rgyung mthu chen 35, 73, 230
stong rgyung rin mo 164
stong chung 272, 322- 324
stong chung zhabs drung 273, 275, 318
stong chung gsan khang 324
stong che 273, 275, 281, 284, 300, 322, 327, 329, 332-337, 343, 350, 353
stong che ston pa 330
stong che bon mang 335
stong nyams snang gsal hun 'grub 275
stong nyid bya 'phur 272
stong mda' 215
stong gsum 'khrugs pa'i yo bcos 328
stod 29, 72, 75, 78, 95, 106, 150, 153, 177-179, 188, 217, 251, 280-282, 328, 344, 358,
362, 365, 397, 400, 403, 421, 427, 431-433, 483, 585, 586, 622-624, 630, 647, 654.
674, 747
stod nag tshang 'phrang 106
stod pa 431, 432, 483
stod tsho dgu 622-624
stod mtsho 'phel 251
ston rgod 746
ston mnyan dam pa bang bkra 164
ston thar 164
ston pa khri gtsug rgyal ba 73, 87, 185, 186, 188, 205, 218
ston pa chung ba 322
ston pa che ba 322
ston pa dus chen 710
ston pa 'bar 164
ston pa rdzogs sku 132
ston pa rang grub 474
ston pa gshen rab 31, 37, 73, 79, 84, 104, 105, 111, 113, 120, 145, 146, 152, 154, 155, 169,
177, 180, 182, 185, 186, 202, 203, 205, 210, 215-219. 222, 223, 226, 228-231, 254,
691
ston pa gsung byon ma 120
ston bla bstan'dzin rgyal mtshan 458
ston 'bum 164
ston lug 164
ston sras 164
stobs chen bzang po 131
800



stobs Idan dbang phyug 275, 331, 335, 336
stobs Idan ye shes 156
stobs po 619
stobs 'bangs 216
brtan srung 'bag 'cham 90
bstan grags 95
bstan rood 747
bstan rgyas gling 164, 165, 187, 468, 471, 582, 583, 590,633, 635
bstan pa dkon mchog 379
bstan pa grags dbang 583
bstan pa 'gyur med steng chen rnam rgyal gling 374
bstan pa rgya mtsho 44, 123, 124, 281, 300
bstan pa rgyal mtshan 104, 124, 133, 146-148, 175, 230, 232, 367, 436, 442, 465, 481, 489,
528, 560, 612, 620,677, 750, 751
bstan pa dar rgyas 145, 146, 280, 289,526, 528, 568, 594, 653
bstan pa phun tshogs 145
bstan pa blo gros 30, 124, 148, 331, 563
bstan pa blo gros rgyal mtshan 563
bstan pa dbang rgyal 209, 406, 499
bstan pa 'brug grags 123, 132, 133, 174,364, 482, 490, 563, 594, 651
bstan pa tshul khrims 81, 153, 168,528, 612, 615, 616, 643
bstan pa tshe ring 358
bstan pa 'od zer 275, 404, 583, 648, 745
bstan pa rab rgyas 275, 525, 528, 530, 532-534, 550, 551, 619, 666
bstan pa rin chen 557
bstan pa bsam grub 745
bstan pa lhun grub 104, 141, 155, 209, 229-232,387,404, 525, 526, 528
bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan 33, 34, 104, 167, 174, 184, 255, 274, 275, 323, 335, 345, 346,
373, 377, 398, 421, 425, 432, 444, 445, 468, 469, 484, 486, 490-492, 504, 515, 521,
523, 530, 590, 605, 612, 615, 628, 667, 736, 738
bstan pa'i Icags ri yi dam stagla i srung zlog 287
batan pa'i nyi ma 29, 30, 34, 87, 112, 133, 336, 428, 429, 521, 523, 524,528, 566, 576, 598.
624, 736
bstan pa'i blo gros 560
bstan pa'i dbang phyug 32
bstan 'phel gling 556
bstan blo 607
bstan rtsis nor phreng rab gsal me long 404
bstantshul 76
bstan'dzin kun khyabs 618
bstan'dzin grags pa 77, 174, 175, 177, 209, 565
bstan 'dzin 'gyur med 377
bstan'dzin rgya mtsho 273, 318, 436
bstan'dzin rgyal dbang 87
bstan "dzin rgyal mtshan 96, 264,458, 594, 615, 621, 629, 646.648, 653, 746
bstan'dzin ngag dbang rnam rgyal 622
801



bstan'dzin mchog legs rab rgyas 622
bstan 'dzin nyi rgyal 38
bstan'dzin nyi ma 466, 468, 470, 628, 681
bstan'dzin dar rgyas 578,715
bstan 'dzin nor bu 155. 560, 623
bstan'dzin mam rgyal 401
bstan 'dzin rnam dag 692, 707, 715.731, 736
bstan dzin phun tshogs 138, 177, 51, 532, 563, 582 593
bstan 'dzin phun tshogs dbang rgyal 609, 611
bstan 'dzin blo gros 252, 277, 594, 615, 616, 633, 667
bstan'dzin dbang grags 103, 145, 240,429, 625
bstan 'dzin dbang rgyal 87, 137, 264, 319-324, 331, 350, 407, 452, 465, 528, 531, 582,
587, 597, 620, 653
bstan'dzin dbang Idan 455, 594, 623
bstan 'dzin gtsug phud 83, 123, 209, 397
bstan'dzin tshul khrims 30,363, 566, 567, 628, 629
bstan'dzin mtshungs med 140
bstan 'dzin bzang po 126
bstan 'dzin od zer rgyal mtshan 96
bstan 'dzin ye shes 149.331,531, 612
bstan'dzin ye shes rgyal mtshan 612
bstan'dzin g-yung drung 496
bstan "dzin rin chen 133, 320, 500, 671,681, 711, 717
bstan 'dzin rin chen rgyal mtshan 30
bstan'dzin rin chen bde chen snying po 87, 112
bstan'dzin rin chen ram rgyal 583
bstan 'dzin rin chen gtsug phud 363
bstan 'dzin ren chen 501, 502
bstan 'dzin lhun grub 87, 88. 149, 209, 653
bstan srung 'bag 'cham 90
bstan lha 750
Tha
tha yud wer zhi 165
tha ra 523
thang skor 289 598
thang khug la 71
thang dga 652
thang ngang 485, 486
thang sgang dgon pa'i lo rgyus 485, 486
thang sgang g-yung drung nags tshal gling
thang chen tshogs pa 376
thang nag 594
thang sna 652
thang smad 297,583
thang tshang 288
485
802



thang zhing 589, 590, 593
thang zhing g-yung drung gling 589
thang bzang rang skyes 320
thang ghas Iha khang 74
thang lha 69-71, 103, 170, 173
thang Iha yar bzhur 170
thab gsos dud gsum 188
thabs chen mkha'rgyud 183
thar bde 385-388, 404
thar bde dgon gyi lo rgyus 387
thar bde dri med 404
thar bde mi g-yo bsam gtan bon gling 385
thar ba 530
thar lam them skas 145
thugs dkar brag 227, 228
thugs dga' 111, 112
thugs rje kun sgrol 183
thugs rje gling pa 421, 464, 467
thugs rje chen po 569
thugs rje nyi ma 147, 150, 360
thugs rje byams ma 81, 123
thung phu 203
thub bstan rgya mtsho 115, 285
thub pa 565, 567
the ge 280, 351, 353, 399,431, 743
the grong 523, 682-684
the chu 365, 471,556, 559,562, 565, 586,588, 590
the chu'i brag dkar bya rgod dgon smin grol nor bu'i gling 586,588
the bo 249-251, 253, 257, 258, 262-265, 267, 359, 583, 584, 586, 595, 666-668
the bo chu nag 249
the bo rong 249
the brag nyos zhing 586,588
the brag nyos zhing dgon 588
the reb gong bon mang 275, 280-284, 287
theg chen rab rgyas gling 706, 707, 710
theg mchog ye shes 273, 274
theg pa rgyal mtshan 565
theg pa chen po dmar khrid 320
ther re 588
thel 144, 150
thes grong 530
tho sgrub 650
tho bo 561
tho byi 509
thog rgod 170, 366, 582, 589
thog rgod nam mkha' rgyal mtshan 589
803



thog ba 509
thog bi 445
thog la "bar 151, 164
thogs med 203, 297, 439, 441-443, 445, 464, 465, 467-469, 472, 473, 475, 481, 484, 507,
528, 582, 590, 612, 615
thong rab sa la 585
thod pa thad ga yu 120
thod g-yu phug 228
thob rgyal 29, 103, 736, 738
thob rgyal sman ri 103
thob rgyal gsar pa 736, 738
thor cog can 253
mtha'ba 523, 530, 630
mtha' bral bsod nams rgyal mtshan 330
mtha'zhu 176.700
mtha'zhu bdud 'dul sprul sku 176
mtha' bzhi 700, 701
mtha' bzhi rgyal ba gtsug phud 700
mtha' bzhi mtha'stung mtsho gling dgon 700
mtha' bzhi gdul ba rig 'dzin 700
mtha' yas rgya mtsho 230
mtha'srung 276, 700, 702, 704, 705, 709
mtha'srung dgon pa 700
mtha' srung mtsho gling 700, 702, 704, 709
mthar phyin 175, 290, 331, 379, 558, 567, 631, 635
mthar smug 291, 292
mthu stobs mam rgyal 368, 370, 372, 373
mthong grol phun tshogs gling 697
mthong chen 363
mthong ba rang grol 241, 523
mthong smad 223, 224
dang ra 374
dad pa rgyal mtshan 164
dan ceb 561
dam can 223, 336, 458,466, 475, 712
dam can rgya mtsho'i tshogs "khor 336
dam can brgyad 466
dam can yul lha dkar po 223
dam can las gsum 712
dam can shel khrab 458
dam Idan shes rab seng ge 359
dam pa khyung sgom 164
dam pa khyung dhus 164
dam pa rgya gar 139
dam pa blo gros 229, 230
dam pa 'bum rje 'od 675, 743
804



dam pa rang grol 363, 474, 476
dam parang grol dgon 476
dar grong 281, 296
dar dga' 142
dar rgyal ha rtse 583
dar rgyas gling 80, 114, 250, 280, 281, 288, 291, 294, 359, 363,498, 500, 524, 575, 596,
599, 614, 617, 620, 628, 643, 645
dar rgyas rgyal mtshan 624
dar rgyas phun tshogs gling 695
dar rgyas lha rtse 590
dar sding 36, 368, 399, 439, 465,608
dar ni 424
dar rtse mdo 396, 519
dar dzong phun tshogs gling 697
dar 'dzum 71
dar ri 421, 424, 436,439
dar ri sbyin pa rgyal mtshan 421, 436, 439
dar lung 415
dar lung dgon 155
dar lo 428, 430, 550
dalai lama 38, 89, 105, 115, 137, 230, 337,375
di 'gu 534
dis mgo 406
du tri su 255, 276, 584, 591, 592,696,711, 712
du tshertogs Idan 384
dug Inga rang grol 112, 276, 320, 321, 711
dung dkar smin grol gling 350
dung dkar tshang pa 295
dung dkar lha gnyan dkar po 350.352
dung khyung 322 323, 334
dung rgyal 362
dung da' 358, 362
dung yon 125
dung ridkar po 516
dung ribstan 'dzin dbang Idan 623
dung ri nam mkha' bstan 'dzin 623
dung ri nam mkha' dbang drag 622
dung ri bya 'phur dgon pa'i lo rgyus mdor bsdud 633
dung ridbang Idan 621
dung ni user mtsho 607, 645
dung lha byang rtse 172
dud rtag 435
dur khrod 75.475, 483
dur khrod gnas brgyad 75
dul ba rgyal mtshan 374, 442, 489, 527, 532, 605,611, 612
duli 709, 713
805



dus kyi 'khor lo 89, 185
dus khrims 530
dus 'khor 140. 185, 256, 276, 287, 370, 522
dus 'khor khang tshan 522
dus yum lha mo 134
de thul 561
de bzo 257
de'u skyes 588
de'u khag 592
de'u dpon gnam lha dkar g-yag 366
derge 358, 359, 363, 372, 374,378, 383, 384, 386-388,741
do khung 165
do 'phags 532, 622
do 'phags chen po 252, 527,577, 605, 611
do 'phags chen mo 251
do sho 459
do sho btsan rje 459
dong mang gur gsum gyi mam thar 672
dong rdzong smug po mched brgyad 175
don grub dpal 747,748, 750
don nyid 76
don gnyis hun grub lha khang 285
doro 695
dorpatan 715,716
dolpo 675, 676, 679, 680, 691,695, 697, 698, 703, 708, 709, 718, 737, 744, 746, 748, 752
dwang ra 70, 77, 83, 101-105, 107, 253
dwang ra khyung rdzony 77
dwang ra g-yu bun 102
dwang ra g-yu mtsho 70, 83, 101, 103-105
dwang ra g-yu mtsho'i 'gro 'dren bcu gsum 101
dwangs ra zla zla 76
drag sngon 362
drag mo rgyal 69
drang srong nyi ma thag'dogs 653
drang srong ma 744
drang srong 8-yung drung 140
dran pa bka thang 256, 402, 430, 470
dran pa drag po 169, 183-185, 187
dran pa bdud 'dul 183, 186, 188, 565, 567
dran pa nam mkha 45, 72, 73, 79, 89, 101, 112, 119, 144, 148, 149, 152, 154, 175-177,
180, 182-185, 188, 202, 204, 205, 210, 218, 222, 223, 231, 240, 277, 284, 605, 611,
698,733, 743, 746
dran pa zhi khro gnas 491
dran pa yang gsang 705
dran pa yab sras 680
dran pa lha khang 83
806



dran pa'i mam thar g-yung drung gsang mdzod 396
dri bda' spos ri 240
dri med khang bzang 590
dri med rdo rje 148
dri med gzi brjid 84, 167, 173, 175, 182, 276, 370, 382.457.508, 569,694, 696,711, 749
dri med 'od zer 261, 264, 421.426, 429, 582-586,588, 593, 596, 599, 606, 644
dri med g-yung drung 130, 148
dri med shel sku 117, 228
drug cu'i gdon sel 328
drung chen nam mkha'rgyal mtshani 166
drung drung 564
drung pa nyi ma rgyal mtshan 745
drung pa dbang Idan bzang po 748
drung pa rin chen dbang rgyal 745
drung mu 30, 151, 153, 209, 577
drung mu bstan 'dzin 577
drung mu tshul ming 151
drung ram pa 253, 273
drel dmar 134, 149, 152, 166, 186, 204, 205, 361,386, 546
drel lung 524
gdan khri 495
gda la btsun mo 172
gdugs dkar 79, 125, 186, 321, 331, 360, 361, 369, 402, 433, 711
gdugs dkar po 711
gdugs dkar bzlog bsgyur 331
gdung dkar 445
gdung nges 280, 289
gdung pa me gsas 141
gdung tshang 328
gdung rabs so so'i lo rgyus cung zad smos pa 441
gdeng thog bsod nams dbang rgyal 482
gdong skya 673
gdong ga kha 267
gdong mgo 280, 292, 526
gdong go ra $26
gdong sgom bstan pa lhun grub 230
gdong dpe 651, 653
gdong dpe dgon pa'i lo rgyus mdor bsdus 653
gdong dmar lha btsan 105, 107
gdong rdzong 113
gdong yas 619
gdong li 524,526, 528
gdong li bstan pa dar rgyas 526
gdong li bstan pa lhun grub 526
gdong li smin grol bsam gtan dar rgyas gling 524
bdal 'bum 144
807



bdud kyi zer ba 500
bdud mgon dgra lha'i rgyal bo 526
bdud bcom 630
bdud 'dul 132, 133, 141, 176, 183, 186, 188, 232, 281, 298, 318, 321, 327, 344, 352, 363,
368.404, 421, 422, 424, 425, 428, 452, 464, 469, 489, 492, 565, 567, 590, 591, 615
bdud 'dul grags pa 452
bdud 'dul sgra sgrags 132, 133
bdud 'dul dbang grags 590, 615
bdud 'dul yang rtse gling 464
bdud nag mgams sgra sgrog 232
bdud nag mngams sgra sgrogs 227
bdud btsan rgyal 145, 156
bdud rtsi khi khar 117
bdud rtsi rgyal mtshan 489, 492
bdud rtsi chu rgyun 168.361
bdud rtsi bum sgrub 96
bdud gzhom 617
bde skyid lha mo 404
bde gling sa gayis 'khrug gees 386
bde chen 40, 76, 78, 80, 87, 101, 112, 138, 143, 145, 148, 153, 167, 175, 185, 313, 369,
371, 380, 386, 396, 423, 452, 470, 491, 507, 509, 522, 587, 610, 615, 631, 633, 654,
706, 707, 711, 713
bde chen gling pa 153, 167, 185, 369, 380,423, 491
bde chen sgang 40
bde chen smon grol 80
bde chen zhi sgrub 470
bde chen zhing sgrub 386, 522
bde chen zhing sgrub chen mo 522
bde chen ri khrod 371
bde chen bsam gtan gling 452
bde chen Iha ri gnam rdzong 175
hde mchog 70,382, 588
bde mchog kun rig gnas chog 382
bde 'dus 376, 379, 402
bde dus sgrub mchod 379
bde Idan nor bu gling 496, 497
bde ba can 172, 331
bde shegs bsdus pa 176
bde gshegs stong sku 88
bde gshegs stong gi mtshan brjod 255
bde gshegs 'dus pa'i sgrub mchod 382
bde gshegs gtso bzhi 73, 88, 136
bde gsal ri khrod 253
bder gshegs kun rig 370
bde gshegs 'dus pa'i bum sgrub chen mo 376
bder gshegs smon lam mtha'yas 370
808



bdod nams g-yung drung dbang rgyal 323
mdangs 'phyar 217
mda' chen 596,599
mda' chen kha ma 597
mda'chen dgon g-yung drung bshad sgrub dar rgyas gling gi lo rgyus 599
mda'chen dar rgyas gling 596
mda chen 'og ma 596, 597
mda 'joms 654
mda' mdo 505
mda' 'bur 654
mda' lung 257
mda' lha ri 403
mdun chu 240
mdo bkra ba 164
mdo skong 652
mdo bskal bzang 711
mdo khams 77, 116, 165, 406
mdo khams lha mo brag dkar 363
mdo sngags grags rgyas gling 240
mdo chu 203
mdo chog cho ga bcu gnyis 287
mdo rta srab 695
mdo bstan 'ol mo gling 620
mdo dar dgon 215
mdo dri med gzi brjid 167, 173, 175
mdo 'dus 705
mdo ba 280, 593
mdo mang 694, 699, 712
mdo gzhung 203
mdo bzhi mo 504
mdo gzer mig 124, 696, 712
mdo g-yung drung klong rgyas 116, 360, 369, 376, 458
mdo lo sprul sku 504
'dan sgrol ma lha khang 363
'dan ma 364
'dan bza 166
'dam thar 396
"dam gzhung 70, 71
du khang ka dgu ma 87
'du gnas so bdun 102
'du ra 442, 481, 484
*dul rgyal phun tshogs 560
'dul sgra sgrags 132, 133
'dul chog 140, 168
'dul ba rgyal mtshan 374,442, 489, 527, 532, 605, 611, 612
'dul ba bstan'dzin rgyal mtsho 594
809



468, 471
'dul ba gshen drug 86
dod dau phun tshogs gling 507
dod rgu phun tshogs gling 505
'dod 'jo nor bu 650
dod byung phun tshogs 80
'dod yon lha mo 423, 483
'dra chu mig g-yung drung bstan rgyas gling gi lo rgyus mdor bsdus
'dra gnas the'u bo 469
'dra bla g-yung drung rgyal mtshan 443
*dra yul chu mig ljongs 442, 445
'dra s-yung drung bsam 'grub gling 464
dra g-yung drung bsam 'grub dgon gyi lorgyus mdor bsdus 468
'dre bu 644
rda nga 619
rda dbus dgon pa 400
rda shis bum steng dgon 187
rdang du'u 588
rdi gu 624
rdi mi 569
rdis bon 203
rdung ri rtse 652
rdo skyabs 595
rdo gla 595
rdo rgyal kha barnam rgyal dbang grags 126
rdo rje rgyal mtshan 428
rdo rje phag mo 70
rdo rje 'bar ba rtsal 69
rdo rje btsan rgod 459
rdo rje tshe dbang 452
rdo rje gzer 'phrang 223
rdo gter 116
rdo rting 115-118
rdo ba 509
rdo tshang 610
rdo rdza 595
rdo zur mo 505
rdo ra 249
rdo li 428
rdor rje kun grags ma 69
Iding chu 532
Iding dpon 375
Ide nag khyung gsas dbal bon 481
Ide bzo 561
Ide'u chen 156
Idong ti591
Idong nags tsho sman 652
810



Idong dpal g-yung drung me tog gling 650
Idong spe 594
Idong ba 251
Idong bzo 257
sda dbon nam mkha'rgyal mtshan 429
sda dbon nam mkha thog sdug 429
sda dbon smon lam tshul khrims 429
sda dbon rin chen blo Idan 429
sding phu 32
sde dge 83, 85, 147, 202, 274, 358, 364, 401, 407, 408, 443
sde dge 'jo mdat 202
sde brgyad brngan bsang 345
sde brgyad bzlog mdos 170
sde chung 366
sde mnying nor lha tshang 96
sde snod thos bsam nyin byed gling 522
sde snod mdzod 255
sde ba 585
sde tshal 516
sde le gong 515
sde slas 516
sdong skam 281, 298, 301
sdong sgom bstan pa lhun grub 229, 231, 232
sdong thog 408
sdong spel 614
sdong bar 652
brda rnga 594
brda snga g-yung drung rab brtan 139
brda sprod nyi shu bdun pa'i 'grel bshad 331
brda ris mda' 188
brda shes 188
Na
na badgon g-yung drung bstan rgyas gling 187
na tsang ma 299
na gtsang 614
na g-yang dgon 141
naki 664, 665
nag rgas 534
nag rgya tshang 328
nag Icog 211
nag chu 69-72, 101, 107, 110, 126, 130, 191, 253, 330, 335, 337, 375, 737
nag 'jar sgang 527
nag po spam chen 125
nag mer mtsho 107
nag mo srid rgyal 135
811



nag tshang 83, 97, 98, 101, 103, 105, 106, 144, 328, 746
nag tshang sger tsho 105
nag tshang nyi ma rdzong 97, 98, 101, 103
nag ru 78, 149, 175, 176, 188
nag ru dgon bsan gtan gling 175
nag ru bstan 'dzin ye shes 149
nag ru tshul khrims 149
nags sked 249
nags gong 249, 259, 260
nags gong bsam 'grub dgon 259
nags 'bul 252
nang skya bstandzin 652
nang chen kun bzang bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan530
nang chen grags pa 77, 152, 154, 166, 439
nang do mtshams chen 96
nang mdun dgon 153
nang so 466, 468, 505
nang so g yung drung bstan'dzin Sos
nang bse ru 149
nan ping 249, 643
nan phing rdzong dar rgyas dgon pa'i lo rgyus mdor bsdus 648
nan phing rdzong rtsub ma dgon pa'i lo rgyus mdor bsdus 645
nam mkha' skyabs 443
nam mkha' khri rgyal 591
nam mkha' grags pa 378, 436
nam mkha' rgya mtsho 431
nam mkha' rgyal po 117, 153, 597, 646
nam mkha'rgyal mtshan 72, 73, 75, 76, 82, 117, 166, 264, 275, 319, 346, 401, 426, 428,
429, 431, 472, 524, 527, 528, 531, 532, 583, 589, 595, 597, 598, 615, 644, 649, 655,
707, 710, 712
nam mkha' sgron gsal 132
nam mkha' bstan'dzin 252, 254, 255, 257, 275, 286, 367, 397,431, 504, 506, 521, 557, 559,
560, 566, 576, 583, 597, 623
nam mkha'mtha' bral 173. 190
nam mkha'snang mdog 472
nam mkha' blo gros 367, 397, 398, 528, 531,612, 747, 748
nam mkha'blo ldan 107
nam mkha' dbang grub 136
nam mkha' dbang rgyal 72, 364, 560, 745
nam mkhadbang Idan 428, 560, 562
nam mkha' dbang phyug 203. 273, 274, 329,583
nam mkha' mi'gyur gtsug rgyan 583
nam mkha' tshul khrims 431,432,531, 532, 578, 579
nam mkha' tshe brtan 381
nam mkha'mdzod 70
nam mkha' bzang po 132, 407
812



nam mkha''od zer 117, 137, 183, 431, 452, 455, 456
nam mkha' ye shes 30, 378, 420, 421,591, 596
nam mkha' g-yung drung 76, 273, 274,374, 442, 556, 596
nam mkha' g-yung drung ye shes 556
nam mkha's-yung drun 76, 273, 274, 374, 442, 556, 596
nam mkha' rin chen 153, 182, 183, 549, 578, 579,583, 591, 597,748
tam mkha'shes rab bsam glan 532
nam mkha' bsam 'grub 472, 508
nam mkha' bsod rgyal 117
nam mkha' lha sgron 560
nam mkha' thun grub 229, 273, 401, 406, 583,612
nam mkha' a rdo 503
nam mkha'i rgyal po 400, 401, 404
nam mkha'i lha mo 88
nas chu 516
nas rdzong 507
nub rtogs ldan bkra shis rgyal mtshan 421
nub phyogs stag gzig bde ba can gyi zhing smon 331
nub byang rtag gzigs khyim gyi yul 172
nub ru 588
ne nang 37
ne'u gsing lam 'og 598
nog wer sgang 334
nor skyabs 230
nor dga' 154
nor bu gling 84, 86, 496, 497, 532, 550, 620
nor bu thar 570
nor bu gdong 82
nor bu bde Idan gling 496
nor bu dpal dbang 560
nor bu spungs brjid 593
nor bu bla ma 708, 713
nor bu dbang rgyal 36, 146, 619,629
nor bu dbang chen 475
nor bu rdzong 588
nor bu lha rtse 138, 148, 526
nor bu'i dbu rtse 397
gnam Icags phur pa 152
gnam steng 178
gnam phyi gung rgyal 135, 138
gnam sman che mo 135, 149
gnam tsho 152
gnam mtsho 69, 70, 95, 141, 608
gnam mtsho phyug mo 69, 70
gnam ri slon btsan 110
gnam ru rdzong 95
813



gnam gsas 117, 491
gnam gsas rgyal po 117
gnam lha dkar chen 534
gnas khog 452
gnas rgod rta ma mdung rtse 366
gnas sgo pad ma gling 464
gnas chen ri bo brag dkar 515
gnas chen gsang ba yang rdzong 254
gnas brtan 73, 79, 88, 89, 170, 183, 185, 287, 351, 354,375, 378, 416
gnas brtan bcu drug 73, 79, 88, 89, 170, 183, 378, 416
gnas brtan 8-yung drung bstan pa 375
gnas brtan lha khang 88,170
gnas nang 385
gnas zhal 483
gnas yag 588
gnas lung 290
gnu khug 179
ma batshang shes rab sgrol ma 404
rna bzhi 380
rnam klong gnyis 75
ram mkhyen kun dga' lhun grub 482
rnam grol rin chen 577
ram gling rdzong 29
mam rgyal kun grags gling 110, 111, 589, 590, 593, 611
mam rgyal khang bzang 74, 183
rnam rgyal grags pa 155.375, 443, 596, 597
mam rgyal mchod rten 121, 146
mnam rgyal stong mchod 75, 89, 113, 140, 141, 156, 233, 343, 351, 353, 504, 533, 578,
609, 610, 623, 634, 646, 693, 698, 704, 710
mam rgyal bstan'dzin 590
mam rgyal thogs med 590,615
matn rgyal dbang 'dus 137, 146
mam rgyal gtsug phud 172, 482,490
rnam rgyal tshul Khrirns 117
mam rgyal gzungs chen 430
rnam rgyal gzungs chen gser dngul bris ma 705
mnam rgyal ye shes 594
mam rgyal shes rab rgyal mtshan 704, 707-711
mam rgyal lha khang 83, 153, 590, 706, 707, 710, 712
marn brgyad 32, 80, 90, 136, 466, 483
mnam brgyad gar 'cham 90
rnam joms 140, 256, 276, 287, 407
mam thar rgyal 313
mam dag rgyal ba gtsug phud 482
mam dag rgyal mtshan S65
rnam dag pad ma klong yangs 156
814



ram dag byams ma 256
mam dag gtsug phud 442, 464
mam dag tshul khrims 102, 653
rnam dag 'od zer 565
rnam rnam tshe ring dbang rgyal 633
mam pa rgyal ba 147
mam par rgyal ba 33, 75, 79, 83, 87, 89, 97, 112, 123, 132, 136, 141, 144, 146, 152, 154,
155, 185, 203, 205, 210, 216, 222, 223, 276, 285, 287, 369, 387, 549
mam par rgyal ba'i stong mchod 276,549
mal 'byor nam mkha lhun grub 229
mal 'byor bzod pa 177
sna skor 534
sna steng 606, 610, 614,617, 619, 622, 624,630.631, 635, 645, 648, 650, 652,655
sna steng bkra shis g-yung drung gling 605, 611
sna steng sgrub 606
sna brag dkar 492
sna sel 75
snang dgon dkar chag gsal ba'i me long 531
snang bgyad 146
snang ngog 227
snang ston 33, 34, 96, 97, 104, 132, 141
snang ston zla ba rgyal mtshan 33, 34, 96, 97, 104, 132, 141
snang zhig 190, 251, 253, 274, 276, 319, 321, 323, 331, 423, 426, 521, 523, 527-529,
531-534, 547, 550, 551, 566, 569, 577,578, 605, 606, 611-614, 618-620, 624, 629, 631
snang zhig bkra shis g-yung drung gling 527.531
snang zhig bkra shis g-yung drung gling gi gdan rabs 531
snang zhig bskal bzang blo gros rgya mtsho 528
snang zhig khag gsum 527,612
snang zhig dgon pa'i dkar chag 614
snang zhig reyal bstan phun tshogs gling 527, 531
snang zhig dngul sku 527, 529,611, 612, 618,619, 631
snang zhig nyi ma rig 'dzin 620
snang zhig bstan pa rab rgyas 532-534
snang zhig dul ba rgyal mtshan 532
snang zhig nam mkha' blo gros 531
snang zhig sprul sku 618,620
snang zhig phyogs las rnam rgyal bkra shis g-yung drung gling 527
snang zhig tshul khrims dbang mchog 527
snang zhig zla ba rgyal mtshan 190
snang zhig yon tan rgyal mtshan 527
snang zhig 8-yung drung bstan pa'i nyi ma 624
snang zhig rin chen rnam rgyal 618
snang zhig gser khang mam rgyal kun grags gling 611
snang srid zhi chen gyi sbyin sreg 361
snang srid zhi ba chen po 288
snang srid zhi ba chen mo 293, 301
815



snang srid zhu chen 576
snang gsal 71, 73, 75-77, 183, 275, 281, 635
snang gsal grags pa 77
snang gsal nam mkha'rgyal mtshan 75,76
snang gsal g-yung drung gsal ba'i gling 71
snan zhig grub thob 209
snas tsa 523
Pa
pa go phun tshogs dbang rgyal 568
pa go shes rab rgyal mtshan 568
pa go bsod nams blo gros 568
pa nam rdzong 38
pa bzi 424
pa le 564
pang ser g-yu mtsho sngon mo 486
pad kho 265
pad "byung 176
pad ma kun legs 176
pad ma bka thang 438
pad ma skal bzang 367
pad ma gar gyi dbang phyug 184
pad ma rgyal mtshan 401
pad ma mthong grol 45, 148
pad ma bdud 'dud 400
pad ma bdud 'dul 404, 424
pad ma mam rgyal 124
pad ma spungs rdzong 567
pad ma dbang rgyal 329, 367
pad ma 'byung gnas 89, 148, 149, 154, 177, 185, 188, 215, 231
pad ma 'od 'bar 183, 186, 188
pad ma g-yung drung 404
padma gling 706, 707
padma 'byung gnas 182
padma tsering 313
padmasambhava 232, 378, 522
pad 'dzin 483
pad bsod 455
panchen lama 32, 285, 318, 332, 362, 380, 382
pan ti ta kun bzang rgyal mtshan 274
pan yon 585
par khang chos mdzod 358
pi kye 564
pu Ide gung rgyal 151
pu rang241
pu rang rdzong 241
816



Index
pur ngo 647
pus mo sgang 34.44
pe khri 626
pe chung 584
pe wa 626
pe gseb 249, 259, 260
dpag bsam ljon pa'i gling 172
dpag bsam lhun 'grub 503, 505, 507
dpag bsam lhun 'grub gling 505, 507
dpa'rgod 222
dpa' brgya 257
dpa' bo 90, 296,425, 595
dpa' bo hri rgan 296
dpa' bo'i ging 'cham 90
dpa'shod 211, 219, 222-224
dpa' shod bla brang 222
dpa'shod rdzong 211, 219, 222-224
dpal skyid 594, 595
dpal mkhar 320
dpal gyi gir ti 164
dpal gyi'ger sti 151
dpal gyi yum 69
dpal grags 629
dpal mgon gral brgyad 75
dpal mgon brgyad 89
dpal mgon chen po brgyad 147
dpal mgon bdun cu 185
dpal mgon rdzong 70, 90, 95, 97, 107
dpal chen 42, 374,529,546
dpal mchog bzang po 132
dpal ldan dus 'khor 256
dpal Idan mi nub g-yung drung gling 441
dpal Idan tshul khrims 87
dpal Idan ye shes 273, 332
dpal Idan g-yung drung gling 260,472
dpal ldan lha mo 458,483, 525
dpal spungs 384
dpal 'bar bzang po 132
dpal 'byung 381
dpal 'byor nor bu 731
dpal rtsal seng ge 650
dpal rtse 593, 598
dpal'dzin 144,749
dpal bzang 131, 169, 352, 373, 379, 427, 464, 482, 490, 582, 594, 651, 667, 748
dpal yul396, 400, 401
dpal ri khud yang dben bde chen sgang 40



likes
dpal shes rab 'bar 250
dpal gshen bstan kha rag s-yung drung bde chen gling 396
dpal gshen bstan mtha' srung mtsho gling dgon pa 700
dpal gshen bstan mdo sngags g-yung drung dar rgyas gling 374
dpal gshen bstan làm ra 481
dpal gshen bstan sman ri'i gling 736, 738, 752
dpal gshen bstansman ri'i gling gi lo rgyus rags bsdus 7 38, 752
dpal gshen bstan 8-yung drung rgyal mtshan kun grags gling 591
dpal gshen bstan g-yung drung bde chen gling 76, 78
dpal gshen 'du ra 481
dpon skor 295, 297, 299
dpon dge 137, 151, 164
dpon dbus 164
dpon tshang 125, 330, 332, 334, 337, 343
dpon tshang ma a dkar 125
dpon tshang gsas khang 332
dpon tshang Nha khang 330, 337
dpon 'ud 151
dpon rin 137
dpon slob 'phrin las nyi ma 736
dpon slob sangs rgyas bstan'dzin 736, 738
dpon gsas tipa 'brug gsas 228
spartogs Idan drang srong 131
spa ston khyung 'bar 131
spa ston rgyal ba shes rab 131
spa ston nyi ma 'bum gsal 133, 139
spa ston nam mkha' sgrol gsal 133
spa ston dpal mchog 40
spa ston dpal ldan bzang po 131
spa ston 'brug 139
spa ston 'od gsal rgyal mtshan 42
spa ston g-yung drung rgyal po 132
spa ston g-yung drung bstan pa 'brug grags 132, 133
spa bstan rgyal bzang po 40
spa bstan pa rgyal mtshan 133
spa rdis steng 203
spa dpal Idan bzang po 40
spa bla bzang po bcu gsum 131
spa ma 131
spa tshang 131-133, 136, 148, 186, 469, 550, 551
spa tshang dgon 131, 550
spa tshang dgon gsar nor bu gling 550
spa tshang 'phrin las rgya mtsho 148
spa tshang tshul khrims bstan pa rab rgyas 550, 551
spa zla 177
spa g-yung drung nam bzang 132, 133
818



spang skong 256
spang gi lung 496
spang gi lung bde Idan nor bu gling 496
spang ge 204
spang nang 497
spang dmar 452
spang bzang 614
spang yul 459
spangri 519
spang la mam gshen 672, 673
spang ser 486
spas thang mtsho 177
spurgyal 103, 153, 154, 156
spurgyal gangs bzang 153
spurgyal bla mtsho 156
spu mer 701-704, 706-713
spu la 113, 133, 151-153
spu la kha 151
spu la ri khang dgon 151
spung mo 701-703, 706-710, 712-714, 717
spun zla grong 481
spun gsum 297, 399, 431
spul sku nam mkha' 452
spul sku namn mkha''od zer gzhan phan mtha'yas 452
spe gu 249
spe bo khyung bdag 382
spen ne ri bkra 171, 177
spen pa dbang rgyal 361, 362
spo 39, 46, 111, 137, 138, 223, 396, 421, 425, 524, 564, 614, 681
spo bo rtse dmar 39, 46
spo 'brug 614
spo smad rdzong 223
spo la 137
spo bsod nams g-yung drung 138
spong 204
spom mda 211, 219
spom ra nag po 172
spor thang la 233
spos ri ngad Idan 229, 241,467
spyang 'gag 152
spyang thang mtsho nag 149
spyang sprul nam mkha'rgyal mtshan 73
spyang be zhu blo bzang 167
spyan gcig ma 69
spyan ras gzigs 144,569
spyan gsal kun 'phel gling 230
819



spyi khyab mkhan po 375
spyi sting 284
spyi 'dul 183, 210, 288, 289, 291, 294, 296,301, 327, 328, 343, 353, 576, 705, 711
spyi spungs 102, 253, 369
spyi spungs skor gsum 369
spyi spungs khro bo dbang chen 102
spyi ba la khro bo'i dkyil 'khor zhal phye ba 710
spyi tshang 292, 352
spyi gso 125, 134, 156
spyi bsang yid bzhin nor bu 361
spra kho 188
sprul sku khro gnyan rgyal mtshan 627
sprul sku rgyal ba g-yung drung 204
sprul sku nam mkha' 454
sprul sku blo Idan snying po 173, 179
sprul sku zla ba grags pa 466
sprul chung 583
sprel mgo 530
spro snang grub thog bla brang 497
Pha
pha bong thang 86
pha bong bon ri 152
pha bong 8-yag ro 186
pha lag 676
phag rgod 583, 590
phag mo grupa 71
phar rka 328
phar phyin 140, 286, 529, 561, 654
phu gu lung 496
phu ba 261, 403, 593
phu nu lho yi 'dzam bu kluri 119
phug gu 227
phug la dgon 187
phug leb 180
phug gsum mdo 700, 705
phun pa zer 509
phun tshogs glang chen 'gying ri spo ra dgon Ill
phun tshogs gling 115, 329, 33, 359, 456, 465, 505, 57, 527, 531, 671, 695, 697
phun tshogs rgyal mtshan 174, 397
phun tshots bstan dzingTags pa 174, 175
phun tshogs dar rgyas gling gi dkar chag 617
phun tshogs mam rgyal 30, 209, 528, 565, 568, 597
phun tshogs bla ma 297
phun tshogs blo gros 30, 82, 111, 112, 124, 147, 378, 452
phun tshogs dbang rgyal 184, 209, 331, 397, 565, 568, 745
820



Index
phun tshogs ºod zer 615, 646, 648
phun shogs dbang rgyal 34
phur nga 508
phur 'cham 499
phur nag 112, 130, 131, 140, 142, 143, 508
phur nag dgon 142
phur pa skyabs 743, 746
phur pa mkha 'gro 745
phur pa sgrub skor 711
phur pa spyi 'dul gshed dmar 183
phur pa lha khang 385
phur ba 591, 595
phen zhol 359, 373, 376, 381-383
pher 500
pho nya gze ma 299, 301
pho nyi bla brang 469
pho brang gling dgu 73
pho lha gnam thel dkar po 150
pho lha 'ba' ba dpal Idan 233
phyag gi dbang po 692
phyag rdor 452
phyag ru 464
phyi skor 277, 297
phyi gung ma 149
phyi rgyud cho ga bcu gnyis 368
phyi ma ye sangs 135
phyug bcu 249
phyug po phu pa 403
phyug mo dpal ri 144
phyug tshang 523
phyug tsho 103, 104, 106
phyogs skyong bcu 88
phrom 284
phrom gser thog Ice 'byams 284
'phags pa mams gsum 249, 251
phags pa blo gros 250
phan chu 592
phan bo 647, 648, 655
phar chen dkar po rgyang grags ma 120
phen 'dzin 610, 635
'phen zhol 359, 373, 376, 381, 382, 383
'phen zhol bon gling 8-yung drung dgon 381
*phen zhol bon dgon gyi lo rgyus 383
*phen zhol bon po dgon 381
'phel 'dzin 610
'phel ya 655
821



phong mda” 519
phong bze ge 655
"phrang lugs 106
'phrin dga' 468, 471, 474-476
'phrin rgya 352
phrin las phun tshogs 746
'phrin las lhun grub 415
'phrul sgron 529
Ba
ba kha 491, 579
ba kha raying ba 579
ba rgya 79, 89, 123, 132, 136, 140, 147, 152, 182, 183, 185, 186, 188, 256, 276, 287, 328,
329, 332, 335, 370, 590, 615
ba jo 507
ba stod 647
ba stod khag gsum 647
ba nang 459
ba smad 474, 476
ba zhun 622
ba zog 509
ba ya dkar'dzang 203
ba yang 254, 352
ba yan 272, 273, 275, 276, 318, 320-324, 346, 350, 352
ba yan bon mang 320
ba yo 647
ba ra bstan 'dzin Ihun grub 149
baru ser glang 172
ba re 427
ba re sgo 427
ba lung chos rje 275
ba ha bon dkar 149
ba lha btsan 176
bag se 189
bang rgyal 152, 166
han dkar 113-115
ban dkar stag phu chos rje 114
ban chung 257
ban de rin chen 139
ban sal blo bzang dpal Idan 149
bab bzo 590, 592, 596,598, 599
bab bzo tshang 598
bam sting 188
bar rgyal po brag dmar 149
bar do'i phrang 70
bar ma 116, 118, 143, 483,629
822



bar ma ye shes rgyal mtshan 629
bar tshogs 704, 710
bar tshogs mchod pa 704
bar mtshams 593
bar rdza 483
bar rong 610, 635
bar sha 473
bar shod 423, 433, 610
bar so 498
bar sle 679, 680, 691-694, 709
bal stod 217
bal tho 188, 211
bal yul gnas 'khod bon dgon dpal Idan khri brtan nor bu rtse'i lo rgyus mdo tsam brjod pa
gtsang chab zegs ma 752
bi cher 698, 699, 705, 744
bu rgod 496
bu sngon 380
bu bom mchog 749
bu 'bo 384, 385, 489
bu 'bor sgang 489
bu "bor tog gi rgyal mtshan 384, 385
bu rdzum 120-125
bu bzhi 445
bu lo 491
bung leng 438, 441
bum sgrub 89, 96, 101, 104-106, 111, 121, 125, 133, 134, 140, 145, 156, 210, 231.361, 369,
376, 416
bum sgrub chen mo sgrib sbyong dril sgrub 361
bum nyi ma dgu shar 699
bum pa 95, 275, 282, 289-297, 352, 475,588,610
bur gu rlung 496, 497
be sgo 178
be gzhung 90
be 'o 117, 118
be ri 203, 266
be ri kha 266
be hu 154
ber rtsa 523, 530
bo skong 647
bo mi 438, 441
bo bzo 655
bo ras 624
bo ri491, 503
bo rig 491, 565, 567, 666, 668
bod khams skyong 69
bod sde 626



bod nang 654
bon dkar 149, 296, 328, 329. 403
bon skyong sde drug 121
bon skyongs skyabs 747
bon mkhar 653, 655
bon mkhar skal bzang rin chen 653, 655
bon 'khor 280, 290, 646, 673
bon dgon dpal Idan khri brtan nor bu rtse 731
bon dgon gsas gdong g-yung drung gling 187
bon rgan 171, 294
bon sgo gsal byed 40
bon brgya 274-276, 280-289, 293, 294, 297, 318, 327-329, 333, 336, 343-346, 351, 353,
529, 576, 666,668
bon brgya khog 294
bon brgya khyung smon 344, 346
bon brgya dge legs lhun grub rgya mtsho 275, 276, 286, 288, 327, 336, 576, 666, 668
bon brgya thang 288
bon brgya nam mkha'rgyal mtshan 275
bon brgya spal mkhar rgyal ba 274
bon brgya sman ri bshad sgrub smin grol gling 284
bon brgya tshogs ras 344
bon brgya g-yung drung phun tshogs 275, 285-287, 289, 316, 346
bon brgya g-vung dung phun tshogs mkhas grub jigs med (2-1
bon brgya g-yung drung Ihun grub 344-346
bon brgya rang shar rig grol 274, 275, 346
bon brgya shog kha 346
bon brgya gsang sngags bdud 'dul gling 344
bon brgya ghas khang 288
bon brgya gsas khang gsang sngags dar rgyas gling 288
bon sngags bdud 'dul me ri 'khyil gling 327
bon chung 155, 294
bon tha 72, 146
bon sde 280, 530, 586
bon sde stod ma 586
bon nag tshang 328
bon nang g-yung drung dbang Idan 625
bon gnas 382
bon po dgon gyi lo rgyus 417
bon po'i bde khug 582
bon blon nam mkha' bstan'dzin 274, 275, 521, 557, 559, 576
bon blon bla ma 521, 524
bon dbyings 78,407
bon zhig khyung nag 148
bon zhig g-yung drung gling pa 144
bon gzhi 376
bon ri 73, 75, 78, 95, 113, 117, 121, 152, 182, 186, 226-229, 232, 368, 398, 469,617
824



bon lung skya mo 116
bya dkar 648
bya khyung 288, 297, 323, 594
bya grong ba 506
bya rgod mchu bris 101
bya brgya tshang 328
bya chen 189, 403, 521, 577, 611
bya chennyi ma 'dzin 521, 577, 611
bya ti lo 507
bya ti lo g-yung drung bde chen gling 507
bya btang 426, 428, 429, 454, 469
bya btang bstan pa'i nyi ma 428
bya btang bstan 'dzin dbang grays 429
bya btang dri med od zer 426
bya btang nam mkha'rgyal mtshan 426
bya btang tshe dbang 'gyur med 429, 454, 469
bya btang g-yung drung rgyal mtshan 429
bya dur 607, 610, 614, 617, 619, 622. 624, 628, 630, 631, 633, 635, 645, 648, 650, 652.
655, 666
bya dur mgo 645
bya de phug 227
bya do 70
bya do nam mkha' do 70
bya mdo bon po tshang 334
bya 'phur 154, 272, 524,531, 612, 633
bya 'phur nam mkha'rgyal mtshan 524,531
bya brang 250-252, 255, 257
bya 'bab 249, 258
bya 'bab gser thang 258
bya dmar mtshal lu 86
bya tshang 615,652
bya tshang rtogs Idan bstan 'dzin rgyal mtshan 615
bya tshe ring 397, 400, 403, 406
bya ze 179, 183, 188
bya ze yang rdzong 179, 183
bya ra ma gsum 135, 149
byang chub 120, 126, 255, 281, 293, 381, 452, 454, 464, 583, 744
byang chub grags pa 126
byang chub rdo rje 120
byang nyi ma rgyal mtshan 469
byang ston nam mkha'rgyal mtshan 346
byang thang 33, 37,113
byang nang pa byang shes 166
byang gnam mtsho 608
byang pa nyi ma rgyal mtshan 359
byang ba khro tshang 443



byang bya dur 607, 645, 666
byams Idan khang tshan 522
byams Idan rgyal ba 256
byams pa 97, 139, 149, 156, 299, 352, 472, 578
byams pa gling skor 578
byams pa 'phrin las 472
byams ma 74, 76, 77, 79, 81, 88-90, 112, 123, 140, 152, 154, 156, 176, 185, 203, 204, 210,
216-219, 223, 256, 287, 360, 361, 369, 402, 409, 705, 711
byams ma mdo lugs 156
byams ma'i gyud 705, 711
byams ma'i mdo chog 361
byar skor 523
byug ri phyug mo 110
bye 'bur 495
hye 'bur dgon pa 495
bye 'burg-yung drung gling 495
bye 'bur g-yung drung bde Idan gling 495
bye ma g-yung drung 229
brag dkar 122, 144, 146, 211, 227, 251, 277, 320, 363, 424, 433, 435, 442, 443, 464, 465,
472-474, 492, 515, 516, 534, 586,588, 607, 624, 626,628, 645, 655, 667
brag dkar bya rgod 251, 277, 586,588.667
brag dkar rtse 'dzin 320
brag dkar zhabs rjes 227
brag dkar g-yung drung 'khyud rtse gsang chen smin grol gling 626, 628
brag dkar g-yung drung nor bu spungs pa'i gnas bdag bskul ba 628
brag dkar lha lung 122, 144, 146
brag dkar lhang Ihang nor bu yang rtse 424
brag skar 534
brag mkhar 614, 647
brag gung dgon pa 691
brag dgon 630, 666, 691-694
brag dgon pa 666
brag mgo 452
brag 'gag 630
brag ryan 610, 614
brag ngon brag 382
brag sngon 362
brag steng 145, 183, 401, 499, 501, 502
brag steng g-yung drung dar rgyas gling 498
brag nag 257, 614
brag bon dgon 562
brag dben 436-441, 507, 558
brag dben bkra shis rgyal mtshan 436,439
brag dben gnas 507
brag dben g-yung drung gling 439
brag den gsang mdzod pad ma gling 439
826



brag dben gsang mdzod pad ma mdo sngags gling 439
brag mar yu ring 516
brag dmar 114, 149, 168, 420,441, 443, 516, 526
brag dmar mgo 443
brag dmar mdo rtsa 420
brag dmar nor bu lha rtse 526
brag dmar ri 'dun 114
brag dmar ri 'dus 168
brag btsan thog rgod 'bar ma 170
brag btsan a bse 111, 149, 153
brag btsan a bse rgyal ba 149, 153
brag 8-yung drung 626,627, 646
brag ra 464, 467, 469
brag ri 175, 579, 610
brag ris ma 579
brag li 467
brag lung dkar mo 746
brang rtswa thang 188
bram 500
bri we 502
bri we pad ma bu khrid 502
bru kun dga' dbang Idan 116
bru ston nyi ma rgyal mtshan 229
bru ston tshul khrims rgyal mishan 744
bru ston mtshungs med bsod blo 116
bru bla dbang rgyal 455
bru tshang 116, 118, 397
bru tshang bla brang 118
bru zhig yon tan rgya mtsho 177
bru sha 172,397
bru sha ram sras spyi ring 397
bla klu dbang 397
bla khri 204, 205
blangan rgyal sras 364
bla sgur 152
bla sgrub 533, 547, 650, 681
bla chung mkhyen rab rgya mtsho 172
bla chung tshe dpag 78
bla chung lhag pa 691-693
bla chen dran pa nam mkha 73, 101, 182, 733
bla ma ka chen 562
bla ma sku gsum gyi drag phur dkyil 'khor 491
bla ma skyabs 251, 569
bla ma mkhar yag tshang 621
bla ma gar skyabs 746
bla ma dgongs 'dus 183



bla ma rgyang 'bod 365
bla ma rgyal ba 505
bla ma rgyal mtshan 563, 596
bla ma sngags pa 744
bla ma chu mig 704, 710
bla ma mchod chog 402
bla ma mchod pa 169, 680, 681, 693,710
bla ma bstan lha 749
bla ma nor bu 469
bla ma phun tshogs 746
bla ma bon skor 499
bla ma blo bzang 436
bla ma rtsa sgrub 276, 681
bla ma tshul khrims 436
bla ma tshe dbang grags pa 505
bla ma gzhan phan 505
bla ma 'od zer 407
bla ma rig 'dzin 'dus pa 187, 361
bla ma rig 'dzin 'dus pa'i sgrub chen 361
bla ma rin chen 750
bla ma a lco 501
bla med 558, 565, 567
bla med dgon pa'i lo rgyus mdor bsdus 567
bla med yid bzhin nor bu'i gling 565
bla ma'i mchod pa 458
bla mtsho 103, 138, 156
bla gzhung 203
bla 'og 644
bla ri btsan gyi phye ma mga rdung 329
blo kho 474
blo gros kun gsal 562
blo gros rgya mtsho 139,368, 371, 372, 528
blo gros rgyal mtshan 34, 167, 250, 384,436,441, 442, 464, 469. 489, 492, 563, 628, 746
blo gros nyi ma 34, 625, 626
blo gros brtan pa 140
blo gros bstan rgyal 208, 746, 747
blo gros thub bstan 565
blo gros thogs med 439, 441-443, 445, 464, 465,467-469, 472, 473,475, 481, 484, 528,
612
blo gros dpal Idan 482
blo gros phun tshogs 384, 385
blo gros dbang Idan 490
blo gros g-yung drung 406
blo mgar 155
blo Idan 33, 34, 42, 76, 96, 107, 154, 167, 173, 175, 177, 179, 181-183, 185, 186, 188,
189, 191, 370, 429, 455, 532
828



blo ldan grags pa 154
blo Idan snying po 167, 173, 175, 179, 181-183, 185, 186, 188, 189, 191, 370
blo bon lha 'bum 746, 747
blo sbyong 274
blo bzang 32, 149, 167, 258, 259, 263, 265, 277, 296,436, 474, 486,556, 557,617
blo bzang rgya mtsho 277, 296, 617
blo bzang chos 'phel 557
blo bzang 'jam dbyangs 556
blo bzang thub bstan 557
blo bzang dam chos 557
blo bzang don grub 258,265
blo bzang don Idan 557
blo bzang dpal Idan 149, 474
blo bzang ye shes 32, 486
blo bzang shes rab 557
blo gsal g-yung drung dbang Idan 482
blon po skos yag 442
bha su 744
bhan 626
bhan gong ma 626
bhan 'og ma 626
bhe te 624
bhe bho rtse dgu 626
bhyo ra nag po 82
dbang gi rgyal po 81, 84, 122, 184, 489
dbang gi rgyal mtshan 105, 167
dbang grags 42, 88, 89, 103, 126, 132, 133, 136, 137, 145, 152, 154, 168, 209, 240, 313.
367, 403, 423,429, 438, 440, 505, 587, 590, 615, 625, 695
dbang dga' 149.417
dbang rgyal grub 166
dbang rgyal bstan 'dzin 560
dbang rgyal hun grub 152
dbang bsgyur 'khor lo can 172
dhang bsgyur bstan pa rgyal mtshan 481
dbang chen dge legs 155
dbang 'dul sdud 507
dbang Idan 85-89, 110, 114, 116, 156, 172, 175, 186, 370, 379, 404.406, 428, 443, 455,
464, 482, 489, 490, 499, 524, 528, 534, 546, 560, 562, 565, 568, 583, 590, 593, 594,
621, 623, 625, 653, 747, 748
dbang Idan 'khor lo gling 172
dbang Idan grags pa 583, 590
dbang Idan dus kyi 'khor lo 89
dbang Idan dus 'khor 370
dbang dan bzang po 747.748
dbang Idan gshen sras lha rje 186
dbang po 77,95, 153, 177, 202, 363, 409, 666, 692
829



dbang po steng 202
dbang phyug 32, 78, 184, 203, 263, 273-275, 329, 331, 335, 336, 372, 404, 577, 583
dbang phyug 8-yung drung tshul khrims 78
dbang phyug rin chen 577
dbang ba 335
dbang dbang 152
dbang bzang 249, 557
dbang li 378
dbal kyung 75
dbal khyung 254, 422, 436-441, 576
dbal khyung dgon pa'i lo rgyus 436
dbal khyung smon lam rgyal mtshan 254,436,439
dbal khyung &-yung drung mthong smon gling 436
dbal khyung gshen bstan mdo sngags gling 436
dbal 'gugs skal bzang rgyal mtshan 465
dbal chen ge khod 135, 750
dbal chen ge khod gsang ba drag chen 750
dbal mchod 704
dbal stag 75
dbal dar 'bum 744
dbal drel 505, 507
dbal phur nag po 112, 142
dbal phur 'od zer 'khyil ba'i sman syrub 189
dbal 'bar stag slag 178
dbal 'brug 75
dbal smon 610
dbal "dzin bstan'dzin dbang rgyal 465
dbal g-yag 75
dbal ri 32
dbal la bzang po 748
dbal gsas 77, 111, 112, 124, 135, 144, 148, 155, 176, 182, 210, 231, 232, 256, 276, 282,
283, 286-288, 291, 293, 294, 297, 298, 300, 301, 313, 320, 324, 345, 360, 361, 365,
430, 432, 465,466, 470, 475,483, 533, 569, 576, 606, 609, 616, 621, 705, 711, 712
dbal gsas skyabs 621
dbal gas sgrub skor 712
dbal gsas sgrub chen 286, 345
dbal gsas rngam pa 135, 144, 148
dbal gsas bsnyen sgrub 276
dbal gsas drag po dgu skor 712
dbal gsas rtsod zlog 182
dbal gsas tshogs 'cham 466, 483
dbal gsas zhi drag 111
dbas gas 289
dbu rgyal ba tshul khrims 138, 139
dbu nag 72
dbu bla rgyal ba tshul khrims 137
830



dbu rtse 74-76, 118, 123, 125, 294, 397
đou rise khang 74, 75
dbu rtse mar chen 125
dbu ishul khrims rgyal mtshan 138, 139
dbu yag 215
dbu ri 137, 138
dbu riskar ma rgyal mtshan 138
dbu ri bstan “dzin phun tshogs 138
dbu ribstan'dzin dbang rgyal 137
dbu ribsod nams rgyal mtshan 138
dbu se 72
dbus phug 186, 227
dbus gtsang 73,374, 746
dbus ru 423
dbus lung nor bu phyug mo 619
dben pa ma lugs 164
dben mdzod 222
dben yul 595
dbon thog 358
dbon po a kru 436
dbon sprul bstan pa rgyal mtshan 367
dbyar mga la 29
dbyar mchod 387, 408, 475, 483, 486
dbyar dus cog shing 650
dbyar dus nor bu 650
dbyar rtswa dgun 140, 222
dbyi dkar 138
dbyig chen ra mngam 172
dbyings klong rin chen 284
dbyings rig mam grol 289
dbyings rig rin po che i mdzod 187
dbyibs dgon g-yung drung thun po rtse 187
dbyibs pa 218
dbyis stod 153
dbra dkar khyung po 165
dbra khyung 137, 153, 425, 433, 434
dbra khyung skal bzang dbang grags 137
dbra khyung rgyal ba bstan 'dzin 137
dbra khyung nam mkha'rin chen 153
dbra dgon 374
dbra ston bskal bzang bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan 346, 373, 377, 421, 423, 425, 444, 469, 486,
490, 491,667
dbra ston rin chen 464
dbra ston lha yi blo gro 374
dbra pa 'dul ba rgyal mtshan 374
dbra pa tshul khrims rgyal mtshan 374
831



dbra dpon mam rgyal grags pa 375
dbra spyul skal bzang nyi ma 375
dbra sprul bstan'dzin dbang rgyal 452
dbraba skal bzang nyi ma 374
dbra bla nam mkha'blo gros 367
dbra btsun nam mkha'rin chen 182
dbra tsha a lha ye shes 615
dbra tshang 443
dbra za mgon skyid ma 363
dbra sras 375, 379, 407, 452
dbra sras zla ba gags pa 375, 452
dbra sras yid bzhin dbang rgyal 379
dbra sras bsod nams lha rgyal 379
'bang ri ba nam mkhathog dugs 358
baº thang 396
*ba'tshe chu kha 344
"bar khams 521, 529, 545-548, 556, 559, 575, 605, 618,643, 660, 666
'bar yul mkhar 654
*bar ra steng 623
'bar la 491
'bu tshab 180
"bu se 623
'bum skyabs 589
bum kho 333, 335
"bum nyi ma dgu shar 427, 430, 508
'bum thar 76, 503
'bum mda' 367, 370
'bum pa 95, 275, 282, 289, 290, 291, 292, 293, 294, 295, 296, 297, 352, 475
'bum rmad 359, 365, 367-373, 382
'bum rmad dgon pa'i bdag gnyer tshogs chung 370
'bur gu rlung 496
'bur lung 222
'bul ri 73
'be tsha grags rgyal 183
'be ru bon srung 173
'ben da 519
'bo tha 190
'bo ba 491
bo la 545, 546
"bo la dgon pa'i lo rgyus mdor bsdus 546
'bo la dpal chen skyong ri 546
'bol la 529
*byams pa khrag mgo 135, 149, 153, 156
'byo ko g-yung drung tha rtse 551
'bras sde 598
'bras spungs 368, 583
832



'bri chu 222, 358, 396, 481
*bri chen sdong ra 172
'bri no 505
'bri ru 71, 107, 110, 126, 136
'bri lung 107
'brig gu 143
'bring po gzer mig 704, 706
'bru 117,431, 614, 624, 431, 706
'bru dga' bde chos skyong ber nag 431
'brug skyid 614
'brug dge 593
'brug mgo 652
'brug chu 249, 250
'brug stan 137
'brug rtse 626
brug ri bkra shis khyung dgon 562
'brug lung 593
'brug sras chem pa 74.88
'brug gsas rgyal 229
'brug gsas chem pa 90
'bre sde 593
'brel 'gyur med rgyal mtshan 121
*bro sde 630
"brog pa 473, 483
'brog pa shog khag 484
'brog bla ma lha yi dbang po 363
"brog ru stong skor 343
"brog ru'istong skor 334
'brog ru'i dpon tshang 334, 343
'brog shog 146
brong khams 654
"brong nam yang rtse 172
'brong nus 467
'brong tsha 250
'brong g-yag zholdkar 69
"brom ston rgyal ba'i 'byung gnas 456
rba mda' 452, 453, 454
rba mda bde chen bsam gtan gling 452
rba phye 454
rba dbyug bor ba 452
rba smyug rong 481
rba zhabs brag dkar 472
rba ru 435
rba lung pa 452
rbang brtsan bse khrab can 531
sba nag 77,188
833



sba ba 84
sba zhabs gnas 442
sba zhabs brag dkar 442, 443, 464, 473
sba zhabs brag dkar dkar chag dad pa'i glu dbyangs 474
sba zhabs brag dkar byin rlabs shugs 'byung 474
sbal lung 503, 505, 506, 508
sbal lung dgon 503
sbas skyes 257
sbas gong 408
sbas gnas 427, 439, 441
sbas gnas gnam lcabs yang rdzony 441
sbas gnas g-yung drung sprungs rdzong 427
sbas yul gtsang ma dga' ba'iri 112
sbas yul g-yung drung spungs tshal 428
sbis tho dgon g-yung drung Iha steng 187
sbis mdo 318
sbus thang 424
sbying ge 424
sbyin pa 120, 346, 383, 401, 421, 436, 439, 482, 489, 557, 566
sbyin pa rgyal mtshan 120,421.436, 439, 482, 489
sbyin pa 'od zer 401
sbyin 'bum 645
sbyer chu 569
sbra kho dar rgyas dgon 187
sbra gur chen po 130
sbra chen 71, 83, 113, 122, 126, 130, 131, 136, 141, 143-145, 147, 151
sbra chen rdzong 113, 126, 130, 131, 136, 141, 151
sbra nag bla brang 78
sbra og 319, 320
sbra se 273-275, 318, 327,329. 331, 333-335, 667
sbra ser nam mkhadbang phyug 273, 274
sbra ser pandita 318,329.331
sbra ser sprul sku 275
sbra ser lha khang 330
sbra hor 191
sbrul tshang 647
Ma
ma gling khrib bya ba 203
ma rgyud 37, 75, 79, 102, 125, 134, 135, 156, 253, 255, 360, 369, 399, 402, 408, 439, 458,
466, 467, 525, 526, 530, 563, 567, 578, 594, 598, 606, 613, 616, 627, 630, 634, 647,
711, 712, 738
ma rgyud sgrub skor 712
ma rgyud sgrub mchod 467
ma rgyud stong tshogs 402
ma rgyud thugs rje nyi ma 360
834



ma rgyud tshogs 'khor 526
ma rgyud tshogs 'cham 75,466
margyud yi dam gsang mchog 135
ma rgyud sangs rgyas rgyud gsum 711
ma rgyud gsang mchog 567
ma ca 655
ma chags se mo do 70
ma mchog srid pa rgyal mo 208
ma ti shod 483
ma tri 105, 106, 111, 121, 125, 134, 140, 145, 168, 170, 175, 182, 185, 210, 231, 256, 295,
369, 530, 533,584, 591,616, 634,646,649, 654, 696,698, 704, 710, 711
ma tri sgrub chen 256, 654
ma tri sgrub sbyong 369
ma tri duschen 710
ma tri 'bum sgrub 210, 231
ma tri rin chen sgron ma 170, 182, 185
ma tri rin chen sgrol ma 106
ma tri'i rgyud 711
ma ni khang 313, 343, 353
ma ni ra kho 500
ma pang 70, 138, 146, 229, 241
ma pang g-yu mtsho 70, 138, 146, 241
ma bufang 285, 318
ma ma mtsho 70, 138
ma mo 232, 576
ma morbod gtong 187, 711
ma mo rood gtong pod 711
ma mo g-yu 'od sman 232
ma btsun 'brog chen 172
martsa 276, 380, 681
ma dzi 476
ma rdzong 97, 98, 101, 103, 107, 180
maru 586
mag gsar 274, 280, 289, 531
mag gsar khyung po dar rgyas gling 575
mag gsar khyung po g-yung drung gling 575, 577
mang stod 344
martka 328
mar sku 168
mar khu 119, 120, 181
mar khu thang 119, 120
mar grong 424, 471
mar sgur 252, 257
mát cho 476
marta 617
mar thang 110, 396
835



mar nang 275,334
mar nang khag gsum 275
mar nas 320
mar pa lo tsa ba 330
mar me'i dgon pa 156
mar legs 359
mar shod 491
mar gsar 575
mal nib 564
mi 'gyur grags pa 72
mi 'gyur rgyal mtshan 121, 230, 751
mi 'gyur gtsug phud 582
mi 'gyur g-yung drung can 172
mi rgud 423
mi rgod 264,515, 516
mi rgod kha 264
mi rgod ri khrod 515
mi nyag 'du radgon pa'i lo rgyus 484
mi nyag Idum ra dgon byung tshul 481.484
mi nyi shod 483
mi bdu 'byams pa khrag mgo 153
mi bdud 77
mi bdud 'byams pa khrag mgo 135, 149, 156
mi bdud 'byams pa khrag mgo 135, 149, 156
mi nub 84, 441, 445, 468
mi nub bco brgyad thang 443
mi nub tshang 443
mi nub mtshan mdo 84
mi nub shes rab rin chen 443
mi pham gro bai ngon po 184
mi pham rnam rgyal 367, 378
mi yul skyid mthing 227
mi g-yo gsam gtan gling 121
mi g-yo bsam gtan gling 119, 120, 123
mi la ras pa 241
mi len teb 564
mi log 500
mi shig rdo rje 183, 185, 369
mu khyung rgyal 151
mu khyud gter gyi gling 172
mu khri rgyal ba tshul khrims 137
mu khri btsad po'i zhang bod rig gzhung zhib 'jug khang
mu khri btsan po 102, 228, 396, 400
mu khri btsan po 102, 228, 396, 400
mu khre 561
mu chu la rgod 499, 500
736
836



mu cho ldem drug 185, 188, 738
mu tra lha'i dkyil 'khor 116
mu po 489, 492
mu la 40, 151,203, 359, 396
mu la snying po 359
mu la ti ro 151
mu li 516
mun sel sgrub pa 609
mur ye 561
me nyag 364, 420, 42, 442, 454, 469, 471, 476, 709
me nyag Ice tsha mkhar bu 469
me nyag stag gsas 420, 425
me tog bkod pa 172
me tog mchod pa 140, 156, 408, 595
me tog spungs mdzes 181
me ston kun dga'rgyal mtshan 138
me ston nyi ma rgyal mtshan 114, 133, 169, 184
me ston shes rab 'od zer 175
me thar 519
me dpung dgu dril pod 711
me bza' brag sbyor 81
meri 32, 80, 115, 131, 327, 360, 423, 444, 466, 499, 705, 711, 712, 749
me ribka' sgrub skor 711
me ri bka ma 712
me ri'i 'cham 499
me srung ral gri 185
me lha 692
mo skyong 647
mo khrom 562
mo the 421, 702
mo the tshul khrims rgyal mtshan 421
mo nam smug po 116
mo nam smyug mo mched bryyad 119
mo ba rin chen 624
mo tsi 506
mo lo kyo 564
mon pa 483
mon mtsher 240
mon yul 172
mon ri zur gsum 717
myi che ba 263-265
myi chen 263
myi rtsa 593
mye rngu 593
myes tshab 164
myo kyo 551
837



ISSUU
dmag dpon 149, 171, 297, 298, 330, 466, 467,475, 483, 576
dmag dpon dgra 'dul thogs med 297
dmag dpon rgyal po yang newer 149
dmag dpon rta rgod "bar ba 171
dmag gsar bon dgon gyi lo rgyus mdor bsdus 577
dma' nyin 595
dmar khrid dug Inga rang grol 112, 320, 681
dmar 'khrid dug Inga rang grol 711, 712
dmar rtsa bza' 138
dmar yag rlung rta 276
dmar ris 313
dmar lam bcu 458
dmu khyung rgyal 164
dmu khri btsan po 253
dmu dge 608, 609, 620-622, 666
dmu dge gla ro g-yung drung dgon 620, 622
dmu tha 189
dmu bdud 466, 483
dmu bdud zhal 'cham 483
dmu btsun tshul khrims rgyal mtshan 184
dmu tsha 117, 692
dmu yul phyo ba gling 172
dmu g-yad 179
dmu ri 227, 267, 667
dmu ri smug po 227
dmu shod tram chen po 106
dmu gshen nyi ma rgyal mtshan 36
rma rgyal spomra 149, 345, 363
Ima rgyal spom ra'i g-yang 'bod 345
mmargyal bla ma 363
rma chen spomra 103, 170, 289
ma gnyan yul Tha'i bsang khrus 345
Ima ting 'phrul mo 172
mma ston lha rgod 144, 148
rma ston lha rgod shes rab seng ge 144
ma mdo 564
rma bya 551
mma yul 630
rma ri rab khyams 172
mma rong 76, 131, 153-155
ma rong dgon 153
mma rong thar dkar 76
ima gsas lha rgod 420, 425
ma lha rgod 420, 481
ma lho 284, 346, 575
Thang dkyil 467
838



rman ri 608
rme nag rlogs Idan 464
rme ba 529,549, 575, 577
rme'u 42, 111, 112, 131, 142, 143, 147, 359, 367, 374, 399, 455, 608
rme'u mkhas pa dpal chen 374
rme'u grub chen nam mkha' g-yung drung 374
rme'u nyi zla dbang grags 42
rme'u ston skal bzang rgyal mtshan 147
rme'u ston bsod nams 359
rme'u tshang 399, 608
ime'u bsod nams dbang grags 367
rme u bsod nams g-yung drung 455
rme'u a yu dang ra 374
mou ngo 595
sma ra 229
smad kyi ngo mo 293
smad pa 297, 298, 483
smad ma khag gsum 257
smad tsho dgu 622-624
smad yul 551
smad lung 249
smad sog g-yung drung 'dzin pa'i gling 72
sman gong 42
sman gcig ma 69
sman mo nag snyil 241
sman tshang 630
sman ri 29, 31-33, 44, 77, 78, 81-85, 103, 105, 111, 112, 116, 118, 122-124, 132, 138,
145-148, 152, 155, 156, 168, 174, 176, 204, 272, 273, 284, 332, 364, 368, 372, 374.
376, 379, 382, 399, 408, 430, 434,437, 440, 442, 452, 455, 456, 465, 468, 470, 483,
490, 495, 501, 508, 515, 590, 608, 609, 615, 666, 677.679, 680, 692, 697, 699, 701,
709.715,716, 731, 732, 736, 738,741, 742, 752
sman ri bar ma 116, 118
sman lha 140, 376,522, 533
sman lha khang tshan 522
smi nub 459
smig ri 473
smin grol rgyal mtshan 577
smin grol mdo sngags bshad sgrub bdud las ram rgyal don gnyis Ihun grub gling 344
smug po ri btsun 170
smug po srid rgyal 135
smug mo srid rgyal 228
smug rong dgu rdza brag dkar 465
sme ba 650
smer phu 695
smong skyid 464, 465, 468
smong skyid dgon mying 465
839



smong skyid dgon gsar 465
smon mkhan bu gdong 363
smon rgyal 359, 360, 363-369.375, 378, 382, 415, 741
smon rgyal dga' ldan dar rgyas gling 363
smon rgyal dgon pa'i lo rgyus 363
smon rgyal nam mkha' dbang rgyal 72
smon rgyal bla brang 175
smon rgyal bla ma 363
smon rgyal Iha sras 365, 368, 432, 437, 576
smon lam mkha' yas 185
smon lam rgyal mtshan 114, 139, 146, 168, 254, 436, 439
smon lam chen mo 286, 345
Smon lam bstan dzin 186
smon lam mtha'yas 79, 140, 147, 155, 168, 256, 287, 370, 470
smon lam nor bu 474
smon lam 'od zer 179
smon lam Ihun grub 482, 489
smyung gnas 156, 210, 298, 328, 361, 365, 369, 376, 384, 402, 408, 427, 430, 444, 453,
458, 470, 473, 475, 496, 497, 503, 504, 547, 561, 563, 585, 598, 609, 616, 625, 644,
649,651, 665, 696, 716, 733
smyung gnas yar tshogs 256
smra ba'i seng ge 32, 74, 88, 123, 135, 185, 738
smra seng 132, 273, 287, 733
stra seng dkar po 273
Tsa
tsa ri 70,267
tsan tan 335, 337
tsi sri 624
tsu ra 523
tse dbang lhun grub 653
tsung chen hu tshe dbang lha rgyal 123
tso shis 438, 441
tsong kha pa 89, 323, 456
gtsang chen gzhi gnyan 386
gtsang tsha 149, 647
gtsang tsha tshul khrims bstan rgyal 149
gtsang Tả 530
gtsang Iha bye yug 171
gtsug gtor nyi ma 'brug gags 165
gtsug phud rgyal mtshan 628, 679, 691-693,707, 746, 750
gtsug phud rnam rgyal 612
gtsug phud dbang 695
gtsug phud tshul khrims 186, 215, 590
gtsug phud 'od zer 30, 565
gtsug phud 'od gsal 186
840



gtsug 'od 398, 400, 401, 403-405
gtsug 'od dgon 403-405
gtsug 'od dgon pa 403
gtsug'od nyi ma'i rgyal po 400, 404
gtsug 'od shes rab 405
gtsug lag khang 374, 500, 700, 701
gtsug gshen rgyal ba 583
gtsugs phud mam rgyal 620
gtso dgradul mgon po 587
gtso mchog 77, 117, 118, 121, 123, 135, 154, 155, 182, 328, 470, 707, 710
gtso mchog mkhagying 123, 135, 182, 707, 710
gtso mchog mkha' 'gyings 123, 135, 182
gtso 'phags 250-252, 277,633
gtso 'phags nyi ma rgyal mtshan 633
gtso 'phags zla bargyal mtshan 250, 251, 633
gtso bla bde chen dbang 'dus 587
gtso bla bsod nams phun tshogs 587
gtso bla bsod nams dbang grags 587
gtso dbon ryan 587
gtso dbon bstan 'dzin dbang rgyal 587
gtso dbon zla ba rgyal mtshan 587
gtso tshang 250-252, 254, 255, 257, 586,587, 608, 610, 633-635, 668
gtso tshang dgon pa smin grol bstan rgyas gling gi dkar chag 635
gtso tshang don po 608
gtso tshang smin grol bstan rgyas gling 633
gtshug phud 401
btsan mkhar 579
btsan rgod grags pa rgyal mtshan 150
btsan rgod mam gsum 362
btsan rgod hur pa gsod skyen 149
btsan rje dmar po 117
btsan lha 556
btsan a bse 111, 149, 153,579
btsun mo 172, 249
Itsa thang 655
rtsa phu bla brang 123
rtsa ba 323, 365
rtsa ba'i bla ma'i gsol 'debs 365
rtsa zhol 647
rtsa ra stobs Idan od zer rgyal mtshan 455
rtsari 84, 156, 267
rtsari rtsa gsar 156
rtsa ri mtsho dkar 84
rtsa ring 267
rtsa ra'i tsha khang 181
rtsarlung gsol 'debs 365



319
rtsa lung gsang mdzod 255
rtsa gsum 131,286, 319.351, 361, 416, 587, 595, 651
rtsa gsum kun dus mchog sgrub 595
rtsa gsum kun dus mchog bsgrub zab mo yid bzhin nor bu
risa gsum cho ga 286, 416
Itsa gsum cho ga bzhi sbrags 286
rtsa gsum bon skyong bzhi sbrag 595
risa gsum tshogs 'khor 319
rtsa gsum lha 131
rtsang tsa 526
rtsal rdzogs ram rgyal gtsug phud 482
rtsi chu 83, 168, 361
rtsi thog steng 119, 120
rtsi nag bu gcig 598
rtsi ri 453
rtsis 'go bdun pa 168
rtsis das nyi ma rgyal mtshan 436
nisub ma 589, 591, 643-645
rtsub ma gong ma 644
rtsub ma stag skyong g-yung drung dar rgyas gling 643
Itsub ma brag dkar 645
rtsub ma 'og ma 644
Itsub ma g-yung drung dar rgyas gling 643
Itsub ma'i la dmar 589
Itse khog 249, 346
Itse brgyad 241
Itse thang 233
rtse drug 168, 181, 183-187, 189,387
rtse dbus 272-274, 277, 318,319,321,324, 529,668
itse dbus rgyal ba tshul khrims 332
rtse dbus bla ma 274,319
Itse dbus tshang 273, 318,321
rtse dbus tshang bsod nams g-yung drung dbang rgyal 321
rtse dbus bsod nams 8-yung drung dbang rgyal 319.324
rtse tshang 589, 624
rtse zhig 272-276, 288, 299, 318, 323, 332, 333, 352, 668
rtse zhig khri chen theg mchog ye shes 273
rtse zhig 'gyur med kun bzang rgya mtsho 273
rtse zhig rgyal ba tshul khrims 288
rise zhig chos rje 272, 274-276, 299
rtse zhig chos rje g-yung drung lhun grub 275
Itse zhig drung rams pa 332
rtse zhig nam mkha' g-yung drung 274
Itse zhig g-yung drung bstan rgyas 273, 274
itse zhig bsod nams g-yung drung dbang rgyal 352
rtse zhig a lags shes rab 272
842



itse gzhung 203
rtse la 'bar ba 226
rtsed sna'i rol 'cham 737
Itswa ring 267, 290, 583, 584
Itswa sa gzhung 598
brtse bzer 650
brtson 'grus rgyal mtshan 186,741
brtson 'grus bzang mo 443
Tsha
tsha kho 332, 350, 624
tsha chu sgur 610
tsha nyal 505
tsha nyed la kha 296
tsha ne 179
tsha ba rong 184
tsha ri g-yung drung dgra 'dul 579
tsha lung S29, 549, 577-579, 709, 714
tsha lung stag tshang 577
tsha lung mam rgyal bsam gtan ling 577
tshang stobs rgyal mtshan 175
tshangs dbyangs 329, 334, 336
tshad med od Idan 73, 88, 749
tshab tsha 628-630
tshab tsha mkhyen rab brtse chen 629
tshab tsha bstan pa gong 'phel 629
tshab tsha bstan 'dzin rgyal mtshan 629
tshab tsha bstan'dzin nyi ma 628
tshab tsha bstan 'dzin tshul khrims 628
tshab tsha blo gros rgyal mtshan 628
tshab tsha gtsug phud rgyal mtshan 628
tshab tsha tshul khrims rgyal mtshan 628
tshab tsha g-yung drung rgyal mtshan 628
tshab tsha g-yung drung bstan rgyal 629
tshab tsha g-yung drung bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan
tshab tsha g-yung drung bstan'dzin 629
tshab tsha rin chen rgyal mtshan 628
tshab tsha shes dbang g-yung drung 628
tshab tsha shes rab bstan'dzin 628
tshab tsha bsod nams nyi ma 628
tshabs ma grags 672
tshams ring Icag 530
tshar ka 695,697, 698
tshal rang 590
tshal ru 588
tshi na 454
628
843



tshul khrims rgya mtsho 111, 631
tshul khrims rgyal mtshan 30, 138, 139, 141, 169, 174, 184, 186, 209, 252, 264, 374, 397,
421,429, 525, 528, 532, 578,594, 596, 612, 628,715, 744, 749
tshul khrims mchog rgyal 381, 421
tshul khrims mchog Idan 364
tshul khrims nyi ma 149, 715
tshul khrims bstan rgyal 149, 436
tshul khrims bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan 255, 274, 275, 521, 523, 612
tshul khrims bstan'dzin 95, 313, 350, 485, 496, 528, 545, 591, 597,618,621, 731
tshul khrims mthar phyin 558
tshul khrims dar rgyas 184.378, 558
tshul khrims nam mkha' bstan 'dzin 286
tshul khrims mam rgyal 184
tshul khrims mam dag 216,465, 500, 627,628,667
tshul khrims mam dag 'od zer 216
tshul khrims blo gros 113, 230, 286, 500
Ishul khrims blo Idan 42, 76
tshul khrims dbang rgyal 34, 88, 156, 169, 378
tshul khrims dbang mchog 527, 528
tshul khrims dbang mo 180
tshul khrims "byung gnas 140
tshul khrims 'od zer 87, 274, 443, 452, 749
tshul khrims yar 'phel 628
tshul khrims ye shes 273, 331, 500, 579
tshul khrims sangs rgyas 715
tshul khrims bsam grub 749
tshul khrims Ihun grub 103
tshul chen 255, 345, 368, 521, 524, 525, 576
tshul chen bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan 345
tshul chen theg mchog bstan pa'i nyi ma 521, 524
tshul chen lam rim 255
tshe skong 647
tshe kho 607
tshe mkhar 294
tshe rgyal 137,615
tshe sgrub rdo rje'i go khrab 183
tshe sgrub bya ri ma 711
tshe brtan rdo rje 363, 367
tshe thar 299, 313, 445
tshe thar 'bum 299
tshe dpag med 185
tshe bum 81
tshe dbang bka' thang 256, 369, 402, 430, 459, 470
tshe dbang bkra shis 298, 429
tshe dbang sku chung 504
tshe dbang grags pa 133, 154, 403, 423, 438, 440, 505
844



tshe dbang mgon po 454
tshe dbang 'gyur med 82, 345, 374,421, 429, 454, 469, 472, 563, 567
tshe dbang rgyal po 203, 612
tshe dbang rgyal mtshan 173, 528, 558, 566
tshe dbang mchog legs 203, 232
tshe dbang stobs rgyal 175
tshe dbang bstan rgyal 167
tshe dbang bstan'dzin 455
tshe dbang don grub 258
tshe dbang drag po sgrub skor 712
tshe dbang bdud 'dul 232
tshe dbang rnam rgyal 232
tshe dbang phun tshogs 140
tshe dbang bod yul ma 123, 124, 255, 287, 576, 627
tshe dbang bya ri ma 442
tshe dbang tshul khrims 695, 700, 707, 710, 714
tshe dbang gzhung bzhi 705
tshe dbang 'od zer 230, 359
tshe dbang s-yung drung 72.168, 183, 368.407,458,482, 490
tshe dbang rig 'dzin 31. 45, 112, 115, 148, 154, 175, 177, 182, 185, 188, 205, 218, 222,
231, 738, 745, 751
tshe dbang legs mchog 230
tshe dbang shes rab 253
tshe dbang bsam grub 746
tshe dbang Iha rgyal 123, 147
tshe dbang Ihun grub 230, 232, 653
tshe'dzin 549
tshe yag 607
tshe ring mkhar 352
tshe ring 'gyur med 377, 379, 380, 383
tshe ring rdo rje 38
tshe ring dpal bzang 379
tshe ring phun tshogs 557
tshe ring dbang 'dus 44
tshe ring rab brtan 122, 137, 144, 146
tshe lung 260, 291, 292
tshe lhun 261
tsher khog 526
tsher ma rong 483
tshes bcu 45,187,319, 382, 438, 440, 678, 681, 704
tshes bcu mchod pa 678
tsho ngan 630
tsho cha 483
tsho steng 559
tsho ba so dgu 71,130
tsho bzhi 593



tshogs brgya spun gsum 431
tshogs 'cham 75, 90, 136, 146, 466, 483
tshogs stong 125
tshogs bdag rol pa 115
tshogs ras 334, 343, 344
tshong 'dus 265, 266
mtshan nyid 522, 615, 630
mtshan mdo 84, 182
mtshan Idan khye'u bzhi 86
mtshan ldan rgyal mtshan 331
mtshams pa dge bshes 499
mtshams pa shes rab 82
mtshungs med mam dag tshul khrims 102
mtshungs med smon lam lhun grub 452
mtsho kha 313
mtsho sngon 71, 73, 486,668
mtsho chen ma 152
mtsho steng dgon pa'i lo rgyus mdor bsdus 562
mtsho thog 483
mtsho mtho 442, 561
mtsho mtho gshen bstan nor bu'i gling 559
mtsho phan 630
mtsho ba 700, 705
mtsho dbyang 71
mtsho yul 709
mtsho lho 346, 350, 668
tsham rang lcag 523
'tshe mi 227
tshogs chen la khang 185
tshogs 'don 169, 170, 176
dza rong skal bzang shes rab 579
dza rong nyi ma bstan 'dzin 549, 578
dza rong nam mkharin chen 549,578, 579
dzam sngon ku bera 150
dzam bha lha 154,630
dzi be 624
dze mu 564
mdzad pa bcu gnyis 88,121, 287
indzo dge 249, 606, 608, 615
mdzo mgo 585
mdzo ngo thong rab 585
mdzo sgang rdzong 211, 215-219
mdzo lo 647, 648
mdzod dge 261, 263, 285, 582-584, 586,588, 589, 593, 596, 649, 651, 666
mdzod dge rdzong gi sa cha'i ming btus 589
mdzob bzang 29
846



dzam gling rgyan 117, 152, 284
"dzam gling rgyan gcig 152
"dzam gling dpal 'bar'du khang 89
dzam gling spyi bsang 35, 360
'dzam bu 119, 153
dzam bu yig chung 153
dzam bu lha rtse 153
dzi bon dbang gi rgyal mtshan 105
'dzing kha rag dgon gyi lo ryyus 400
dzin khog 396
'dzin chu 396
dzu pa 624
rdza dkar so ma 166
rdza khog 72, 363, 364,368, 375, 377, 423,443,469
rdza dge sprul yid bzhin legs 'grub 472
rdza chu 169, 173, 222, 363, 367, 371, 374, 377, 415, 432, 464, 481
rdza steng chen 374, 377, 378, 452
rdza steng chen dgon gyi lo rgyus 374, 377
rdza stod rin chen spungs pa 359, 362
rdza nag 564
rdza pa tshe ring 'gyur med 377, 379, 380, 383
rdza bo rig pa rang shar 565, 567
rdza 'bum rmad dgon gyi lo rgyus 370
rdza dmar 80-84
rdza dmar shari 80, 81
rdza gzhi 653, 655
rdza gzhi dgon 653
rdza gzhi brag dkar 655
rdza yul 367
rdza ri 257, 359, 360, 364, 372, 376, 379, 423
rdza lung 472
rdza gseb 143
rdzas nub 459
rdzu 'phrul klu dbang 227
rdzu "phrul phug 84, 107
rdzu "phrul sman bzhi 135, 149
rdzum 111, 120-125
rdze tsha ba 655
rdzogs sku mkha' 'gying dkar po 277
rdzogs chen 78, 82, 187, 255, 275, 374,529,585, 627,672, 673, 732, 737
rdzogs chen sku gsum rang shar 187,627
rdzogs mda 173
rdzong chung kha 230
rdzong chung steng 227, 228
rdzong nang 654
rdzong 'phrang le'u gsum pa 183
847



rdzong dmar 171
rdzong tsa kha 267
rdzong lu ye shes 465
rdzong gsar 383, 384, 677
rdzong gsar dgon gyi lo gyus
rdzong gseb 176
383
187
Wa
wa khog 178
wa dge 187-189
wa dge dgon phun tshogs g-yung drung gling
wa sgo 208
wa thang 593
wa thung 377
wa dag 223
wa dag bon dgon 223
wa de 467
wa pa 380
wa ba 509
wa 'bru 222
wa zha 406
wa zur 476
wa lung 438, 441
wa lo mgon po 466
wu'u c'o 655
wur go 467
we bu 561
wer sgo 534
wer to 625, 626
wer to rgyal ba bkra shis 625
wer to bstandzin dbang grags 625
wer rtse ko 551
wo gzhi 556
wod pa 626
wointog 358
vairocana 183, 507
vajrapani 452
Zha
zha bo zhabs ma nyi ma grags pa 429
zha zhi 202
zhag "dug 530
zhang ngu khog 622
zhang ngu dpal gshen bstan nyi ma 'bum gling gi dkar chags (chag) gsal ba'i me long 624
zhang ston ba thang pa 42
zhang ston tshul khrims blo Idan 42
848



zhang bu 353
zhang zhung 102, 103, 105, 106, 119, 124, 131, 135, 144, 146, 151, 164, 166, 172, 175,
229, 283, 363, 396, 423, 430, 439, 621,672, 673, 705, 732, 737
zhang zhung mkhan po 106
zhang zhung gi shon gar 737
zhang zhung sgo pa 102, 164
zhang zhung snyan brgyud 363, 430, 439, 673, 705, 732
zhang zhung mam rgyal ha rtse 131
zhang zhung meri 423
zhabs dkar pa 287
zhabs drung phug 70
zhabs drung bsod nams g-yung drung dbang rgyal 273, 274,318
zhabs tsho ba 509
zhal gdams 183, 274
zhi ke po 624
zhi kro rgyab bkrod 77
zhi khro 75, 77, 80, 96, 113, 118, 125, 134, 141, 145, 156, 170, 183, 184, 186, 187, 231,
282, 289, 294, 295, 328. 360, 361, 365. 369, 402, 416, 427, 430, 491, 508, 533, 576,
588,681, 712
zhi khro khri mchod 141, 231
zhi khro dgongs 'dus 145, 183, 187, 369
zhi khro sgrub skor 712
zhi khro sgrub chen 360, 427
zhi khro dam pa rig brgya dkyil 'khor 365
zhi khro rigs brgya 361
zhi khro gsang ba 'dus pa 186
zhi thang 287
zhi tho pur 564
zhi ba kun du bzang po 105
zhi ba kun bzang a skor 115
zhi ba g-yung drung yongs rdzogs 116
zhi ba sa le 499, 500
zhi ba a gsal 75, 156
zhi Iha zhe Inga 74
zhig gung 534
zhig chung nam mkha' mtha bral 173
zhig po kun rtse 131
zhig bro 546
zhing 'khyil 598
zhing stong thang 426
zhing yul pa 598
zhu skye se chen po 38,272
zhu khri 'od 137,209
zhu khri 'od rgyal mtshan 137
zhu khri g-yung drung grags rgyal 209
zhu rgyal ba dbang grags 209
849



SATI
zhu sgom khri btsun 455
zhu sgom "phrul zhig 272, 527, 611
zhu sgom "phrul zhig chen po 272
zhu sgrol ba gshen rgyal 38
zhu ce 655
zhu nyi nyi lags 209
zhu nyi ma yras pa 209
zhu ston rgyal mtshan nyi ma 133
zhu ston bstan pa lhun grub 209
zhu ston tshul khrims grags pa 209
zhu ston g-yung drung rgyal ba 209
zhu bstan pa dbang grags 209
zhu bstan'dzin grags pa 209
zhu bstan'dzin nyi rgyal 38
zhu bstan'dzin gtsug phud 209
zhu nam mkha' khri khyung 146
zhu mam rgyal dbang grags 209
zhu sprul bsod nams dbang rgyal 184
zhu phun tshogs dbang rgyal 209
zhu bo 39, 46
zhu btsan grags rgyal 121
zhu btsun 8-yung drung khri bde 208, 209
zhu btsun g-yung drung khri 'od 119, 120
zhu btsun g-yung drung dbang grags 209
zhu tshang 111, 177,368, 443, 608
zhu tshul khrims rgyal mtshan 209.397
zhu zla ba grags pa 209
zhu bza' g-yung drung mtsho 397
zhu yas legs po 38, 272
zhu g-yas 119, 122-124
zhu g-yas bstan pa rgya mtsho 124
zhu g-yas pad ma rin chen 122
zhu g-yas g-yung drung rgyal mtshan 124
zhu g-yas rin chen dbang rgyal 124
zhu g-yas legs po 119
zhu g-yas bsod nams dpad rgyal 123
zhu g-yung drung kun grags gling 742
zhu g-yung drung ye shes 209
zhu g-yung drung rang sgrol 148
zhu g-yung drung bsod nams 209
zhu lugs sog zam 120
zhu shes rab bstan'dzin 209
zhu lhun grub rgyal mtshan 209
zhe chen stag mgo 370
zhe nang 177
zhe nang dgon g-yung drung dpal ri 177
850



531
zhe phan 523
zhe zhung 177
zhes phen 530
zho'ong nyin tha 281, 295
zho lung 290
zhwa khra 82, 313
zhwa khra 'chi med 82
zhwa khra lha rams pa 313
zhwa gling kha 218, 219
zhwa nag tshogs 'cham 90
zhwa dmar 334
gzha' tsha rig 'dzin lha mo 404
gzhi bdag gnyan po rbang btsan bse khrab can gyi bsang mchod bstod bsku
gzhi bdag gnyan po g-yurtse'i bsang mchod bdud rtsi 'khyil ba 531
gzhi bzhor 561
gzhi ring 429, 505
gzhi ring a khu tshe dbang 505
gzhi ris nam mkha' bsam 'grub 508
gzhu ring 458
gzhung ring 456,458,460, 504, 505
gzhun ring 504
bzhag 438, 441, 442, 489
bzhag ra lha rtse 442
bzhag ri438, 441
bzhad mthong smon rdzong 36
bzhi mdo 564
bzhi mo 504, 505
Za
za hor 172
zang mda' 445
zang brag dmar po 516
zangs ri 42
zam kha 117, 377, 598
zal mo sgang 359
zire 427
zing (zung) chu rdzong dgon pa so sogs (so'i) dkar chag 607, 614,617,620, 622,626, 668
zing ba mthu chen 173
zu lung 299
zung chu 251, 590, 605, 607, 608, 611, 615, 617, 620, 622, 624, 625, 627, 628, 631, 633,
666
zur dkar ba 164
zur pa 420
zur lung kha 267
zer 'phro 359, 365, 372, 373, 376, 377, 379-381
zer 'phro dgon pa'i lorgyus 379,380
851



zer "phro tshul khrims dbang phyug 372
zo bza' dgyes skyid 139
zla khog 506
zla grags 169, 172
zla grags nyi ma 'od zer 169
zla grags tshul khrims dbang rgyal 169
zla grags rin chen rgyal mtshan 169
zla grags rin chen dpal bzang 169
zla grags rin chen phun tshogs 169, 172
zla rgyal bzang po 131
zla ba grags 174, 209, 363, 375, 421, 452, 455-457, 466, 468, 471
zla ba rgyal mtshan 33, 34, 96, 97, 104, 132, 133, 141, 167, 190, 250, 251, 378, 527, 530,
533, 565, 587, 606, 607, 612, 613, 616, 621, 630, 632, 633, 738
zla ba don 'grub 230
zla ba lha rtse 149
zla 'od 398, 400, 401, 403-406
zla 'od dgon gyi lo rgyus 403, 406
zla 'od sgrol ma 404
zla 'od nam mkhathog'dzin 403
zla 'od nam mkha'i rgyal po 400, 401, 404
zlari a kag 151
zla shel 191
zla shel bon dgon 191
zlas chog rin chen sgron ma 598
gzags kyi nyi ma'i mam thar 711
gzatshang 588
gza'ru 586
gza' ru khro rgyal 586
gzi cha 506
gzi tsha 590, 591, 643, 645,651, 653, 655
gzi tsha sde dgu 643, 645, 651, 653, 655
gzi yar sku 168
gzi lung 491
gzig sgang 257
gzim g-yag 556
gzu pa 151
gzu bon 151
gzung mgon 403
gzungs jug 430
gzungs 'bum 324
gze ma 75, 299, 301, 334-337
gze ma dgu 'cham 75
bzang pori 42
bzang ri 42, 43
bzang ri dgon 42
bzan ri 43
852



H
bzo gnyan mgar ba yon tan 619
bzod sgom 568, 570
bzod sgom bkra shis mam rgyal gling 568
bzod sgom dgon pa'i lo rgyus mdor bsdu 570
bzod pa 73, 81, 101, 124, 141, 175-177, 323, 350, 523
bzod pa dge slong 81
bzod pa rgyal mtshan 73, 124, 141, 523
bzod pa bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan 323
bzod pa mthar phyin 175
bzlas chog bum sgrub 89
'A
'a zha 259, 489, 492, 591, 592
'a zha blo gros rgyal mtshan 489, 492
'u gzur 296
'o mkhyen 505
'o yul ra chu 33
*o lha rgyal bzang 33, 36
og min dga' 481
og tshom dkar po 106
'og sa kha 266
'ong skor 38
ong gong 464, 465
'od dwangs 380
'od ldan 'bar ba 81
'od zer gling pa 421, 439, 464, 469
on chung 749
om bu 101, 102, 106
'om bu bsam gtan gling 101
'ol mo lung ring 74, 172, 226, 331, 738, 743
'os bab 217
Ya
ya go 652
ya ngal 695, 697
ya ngal gdung rabs 672, 675, 698, 743
ya nge thod pa 125
ya tung 44
ya dar 491
ya pori 676
ya ma bkra shis 557, 558, 567
ya ma skyong 69
ya ma rgyal 407
ya ma tshe ring 476
ya ru kha 267
ya ho 614
853



yag gi tsho ba bzhi 607
yag chu 72
yag nyes 328
yag nyes tshang 328
yag snya bsod nams rgyal mtshan 173
yag tsa 593
yag zam kha 117
yag yul 208
yag re 500
yang ga 38
yang grong 424
yang dgon 697
yang dgon mthong grol gling 697
yang ngal stod rgod 747
yang ston 330,671,672, 674-676, 698, 699, 746, 748-750
yang ston bkra shis rgyal mtshan 671
yang ston dgon pa 698
yang ston rgyal mtshan rin chen 698, 699
yang ston chen po 672
yang ston don grub dpal 750
yang ston bla ma 675, 676
yang ston dbang rgyal 746
yang ston gtsug phud rgyal mtshan 746
yang ston od zer rgyal mtshan 750
yang ston g-yung drung rgyal mtshan 748
yang ston g-yung drung mam rgyal 750
yang ston g-yung drung tshul khrims 749
yang dben 40, 184, 187, 227, 454, 455
yang med 433
yang rdzong 179, 183, 254, 441
yang gzhung 438, 441
yang yan 647
yang le 257
yangtze 358, 385, 387, 396, 481, 495, 605
yab zin bon ston 481
yab sras tshogs 'khor 89, 170
yar kha 120, 296
yar grong 424, 471
yar rgan 556
yar sgur 257
yar ta 617
yar thang 362
yar nas 320
yar 'brog 175
yar ru kha 267
yar lung 368, 396, 652
854



yar lung gtsang po 226
yar shod 491
yar lha sham po 103, 170
yi ge 142, 143
yi ge rag sna 143
yite 471
yi dam kun 'dus 282, 283, 287, 294, 295, 320, 321, 351, 530, 584, 591, 592, 606, 644
yi dam kun 'dus kyi tshogs mchod 286
yi dam kun 'dus las tshogs 76
yi dam phyi nang gsang gsum gyi skang ba 360
yi dam zhi drag 365
yi rdib 564
yi ban kyo 564
ying mad 430
yid dga' 383
yid bzhin bkod pa can 172
yid bzhin rgyal ba 167
yid bzhin rgyal ba tshul khrims 174
yid bzhin dbang gi rgyal po 84
yid bzhin dbang rgyal 361, 379
yu ska 561
yu gur 172
yu bo 646
yu ring 469, 516
yung drung dpal ri 124
yum chen thugs rje byams ma 81
yum chen rdo rje phag mo 70
yum chen shes rab byams ma 88, 185
yum sras ma bdud khro gnyer ma 149
yul kha bcu gnyis 671,684
yul bla ra na se 82
yul lung 444
yul lung phug 445
yul shul 481
yul sa gsol 704, 710
yul sa gsol kha 710
yul gsum 592
ye rgyal ba 166
ye tha 40, 130-133, 136, 137, 151, 168
ye tha nor bu tshe rgyal 137
ye tha lung dkar dgon 136
ye phyi gung sangs 135
ye bzang 428
ye shes rgyal ba 594
ye shes rgyal mtshan 119, 120, 167, 169, 330, 331, 335, 397, 428.528, 594, 612, 629, 750
ye shes nyi ma 202



ye shes bstan'dzin 359, 367
ye shes spos mdud dgon 420
ye shes dhang ldan 156, 175
ye shes dbal mo 149, 232
ye shes tshul khrims 264
ye shes tshe dbang 505
ye shes tshe ring 409
ye shes mtsho rgyal 164, 281, 284
ye shes bzang po 428
ye shes bshad sgrub gling 420, 421
ye shes lha 'dzoms 398
ye gshen bcu gsum 86
yo kyun pa 443
yo sho 473
yongs 'dzin bstan 'dzin rnam dag 731
yongs dzin 'brug gsas chems pa 359
yongs su dag pa 139
yon tan rgya mtsho 155, 169, 177, 409, 523, 565, 567, 620
yon tan rgyal mtshan 331, 527, 612
yon tan nyi ma 557
yon tan rin chen 167, 407
yos mo nyal sa 320
g-yag mgo rdo 'bum 619
8-yag se 177
g.yang skor 75
g-yang rgyal 154
8-yang sgrub 'phrin bcol 274
8-yang job 152
g-yang rten 610
g-yang stod phu pa 403
8-yang zla gzhi 400
S-yang ra nang 175
g-yang ra brag rtsar 173
g-yang lung ra gsum 330
g-yang shod 110-113, 119
g-yang shod mar thang 110
g-yam tha 189
g-yaºkhang 334
g-yar mo sil 69
g-yas ru dben sa kha 29, 44, 330,374, 399, 529
g-yi tshang 592
g-yu skod 576
g-yu mgo 408
8-yu sgra snying po 177
8-yu sgron 69, 172
g-yu phug 229
856



g-yu bun 102, 106
g-yu bo blo gros 557
g-yu 'brang phyug mo 38
5-yu 'brug sngon po 86
g-yurtse 74, 76, 90, 172
g-yu rtse khang 74
g-yu mtsho 138, 189
g-yu 'od sman btsun 227
g-yu lung 137, 138
8-yung grags pa 168
g-yung dga' 154, 177.614
g-yung rgyal 180
g-yung nyi ma rgyal mtshan 150
8-yung dung dar rgyas 352
g-yung drung kun khyab 597,622, 629
g-yung drung kun grags gling 155, 208, 709, 742, 752
8-yung drung klong gyas 533
g-yung drung klong rgyas 45, 87, 156, 231, 360, 533, 561, 566, 598, 644
g-yung drung bkod legs 79, 87-89, 146, 174, 185
g-yung drung bkra shis 594
8-yung drung khri zer 560
&-yung drung khri 'od 113, 119, 120
g-yung drung grags pa 122, 146, 154, 176
g-yung drung gling 33, 34, 39, 41, 42, 45, 78, 96, 104, 119, 120, 132, 136-138, 141, 144,
146, 151, 152, 167, 168, 173, 231, 252, 253, 368, 372, 376, 399, 423, 439, 454, 468,
495, 589, 609, 627, 733, 736, 738
g-yung drung gling pa 144,627
s-yung drung dgu 'cham 32,90
g-yung drung dge legs 186
g-yung drung dgon 381, 547, 548, 620, 622
g-yung drung dgra 'dul 289, 509, 579
S-yung drung mgon po 748
g.yung drung 'gyur med 261, 626
g-yung drung rgyal po 132, 747
g-yung drung rgyal ba 87, 147, 174, 209,567
8-yung drung rgyal mtshan 30, 117, 124, 148, 152, 167, 174, 184, 189, 230, 272, 273.
313, 318, 350, 401, 404, 421, 429, 443, 455, 465, 472, 482, 485, 490, 492, 527, 565,
583, 605, 611, 620, 628,677, 679, 680,695, 701, 745, 748, 750
g-yung drung 'chi med 496
g-yung drung nyi rgyal83
8-yung drung nyi ma 378, 482, 490, 497, 606
g-yung drung gtams rdzong 567
g-yung drung Ita steng 498
g-yung drung bstan rgyal 167, 397, 406, 590, 608, 609.611, 615, 629
8-yung drung bstan rgyal gling 167
g-yung drung bstan rgyas 164, 187, 273, 274,332, 468, 471. 582, 583, 590, 608
857



g-yung drung bstan rgyas gling 164, 187, 468, 471, 582, 583, 590
g-yung drung bstan pa 104, 132, 133, 148, 184, 375, 398, 421, 429, 528, 590, 591, 605, 624,
628, 748, 749
g-yung drung bstan pa rgyal mtshan 148
8-yung drung bstan pa dar rgyas 528
g-yung drung bstan pa 'brug grags 132, 133
g-yung drung bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan 104, 184, 398, 421, 590,605, 628
8-yung drung bstan pa'i nyi ma 429, 528, 624
8-yung drung bstan dbang 577
g-yung drung bstan'dzin 113, 177, 258, 274, 397, 432, 434, 443, 455, 456,458,465, 468,
469, 485, 505, 560, 562, 568, 583, 586,587, 609, 612, 621,628,633
s-yung drung bstan 'dzin rgyal mtshan 621
g-yung dung bstan dzin phun tshogs 177
g-yung drung thar 611
3-yung drung thogs med nyi ma 507
g-yung drung thos grol 590, 593
g-yung drung mthu rtsal 566
8-yung drung mthong grol 155, 185, 406, 428
g-yung drung dar rgyas 114,362, 498, 500, 502,628, 643, 645, 661, 699
g-yung drung dar rgyas gling 114, 498, 500, 628, 643, 645
g-yung drung dar rtse 427
S-yung drung don grub 436,437, 439,440
g-yung drung bdud 'dul 421, 422, 425, 492, 591
g-yung drung bde chen gling 78, 143, 145, 507,509
8-yung drung bde ldan gling 495, 496
8-yung drung nam bzang 131-133
g-yung drung nor bu 484, 645
-yung drung rnam rgyal 124, 230, 313, 331, 367, 378, 407, 443,736, 748-751
8-yung drung mam 'joms 256
5-yung drung mam dag 153, 431, 484,566, 567
g-yung drung dpal bzang 464
g-yung drung dpung rdzong 152
g-yung drung phun tshogs 101, 140, 154, 177, 230, 275, 285-287, 289, 318, 329, 332, 346,
482, 490, 566, 567, 597, 625, 634, 643, 645, 749
g-yung drung phun tshogs gling 329, 332
g-yung drung phyug mo 706, 707, 709, 711
8-yung drung 'phrin las 367
8-yung drung bon bstan 'phel rgyas gling 272
g-yung drung blo gros 397,625, 626, 652
g-yung drung blo gros nyi ma 625, 626
S-yung drung blo gsal 397,505, 508
S-yung drung dbang rgyal 30, 44, 137, 155, 189, 230, 232, 323, 407, 445, 466, 608, 609,709
g-yung drung dbang Idan 406,489, 568, 625
g-yung drung dbang mo 404
8-yung drung mi zhig rdo rje 174
8-yung drung smon lam 482, 485, 490
858



g-yung drung gtsug rgyan 591, 597
g-yung drung gtsug phud 568
g-yung drung tshul khrims 30, 78-80, 85, 472, 495, 521, 563, 578, 611, 618, 650, 653, 742,
749
g-yung drung tshul khrims dbang grags 168
g-yung drung tshe mchog 152
g-yung drung tshe ring 44, 612
g-yung drung bzang po 132
8-yung drung 'o tshal gling 142
8-yung drung 'od 'bar 459
g-yung drung ye shes 95, 104, 124, 147, 209, 454-456, 468, 563
8-yung drung ye shes 'od gsal 583
8-yung drung yongs rdzogs 135, 361
g-yung drung yon ten rgya mtsho 156
g-yung drung rab rgyas 498
-yung drung rab brtan gling 131, 434
g-yung drung rin chen 'bar ba 430
g-yung drung shug tshal gling 691-694
g-yung drung shes rab bstan 'dzin 591, 593
g-yung drung gsang phug 481
g-yung drung gas mkhar 652
g-yung drung gsas pa 428
8-yung drung bsam 'grub dgon 263, 593
g-yung drung bsam 'grub dgon nor bu'i gling 593
g-yung drung bsam 'grub dgon nor bu'i gling gi lo rgyus mdo tsam 596
g-yung drung bsod nams 122,209
8-yung drung Iha gnyan risal 227
g-yung drung Iha steng 187, 332, 500, 545, 556, 559
8-yung drung Iha Iding dgon pa'i lo rgyus mdor bsdus 559
S-yung drung lha brag gling 153
g-yung drung Iha mo 407
g-yung drung Iha rtse 103, 293, 534, 549
2-yung drung Ihun grub 274,335,337, 344-346, 406, 485, 591
g-yul las mam rgyal617
g-ye rtse 154
g-yo lag sgom chen 104
Ra
ra skor zhing gi ri khrod 618
ra kho 500, 516
ra khrom 173
ra dge 598
ra 'gu 624
Ta ngàn 353
ra sngon "bri sde 590
ra thang rtogs Idan dkar po 622
859



Ta mdung 177
ra sde 505
ra nang 175, 251, 257
ra gni 424
ra ma blari 509
radmar brag 454
ra tshang 588
ra tsho lcags thar 465
ra zur 505
ra 'og 370
ra la 33, 96, 377
ra lag (ru lag) g-yung drung gling 33,96
rag khyab 396
rag gong 483
rag stag nor bu 619
rag pa g-yu rtse 171
rag tsa 523
rag shi 114, 229
rag shi nyi ma rgyal mtshan 229
rag shu kun bzang snying po 148
rag shu rtogs Idan dri med g-yung drung 130
rang grol bla ma rgyal mtshan 596
rang gter sku gsum phur sgrub 432
rang ita rin chen 407
rang bya 229
rang byung rgyal 69
rang byung rdor rje 84
rang rig 407
rab mgo 404
rab brtan 122, 131, 137, 139, 144-146, 183, 434, 456, 558, 563, 564
rab brtan shes rab 404, 407
rab gnas 361, 556, 748
rab gnas skor 711
rab pa 216-218
rab byung 72, 81, 112, 114, 136, 155, 228, 272-274, 319, 359, 367, 374,378, 381, 384, 398,
404, 405, 426, 428, 434,436,439, 452, 458, 464, 465, 474, 481, 485, 495, 497, 501,
503-505, 515, 525, 532, 556, 560, 562, 567, 568, 577, 582, 583, 588-590, 594, 596,
615, 620, 622, 633, 645, 648
rab dben 646, 653, 655
rab dben bkra shis phun tshogs gling 653
rab dben dgon pa'i lo rgyus mdor bsdus 655
rab 'byams pa shes rab rnam rgyal 273
rab mi bo 37, 73, 83, 121, 124, 138,361,387,399, 469, 474, 499, 530, 653, 661, 733, 738
rab gsal zhabs 415
rabs mang 366
rams pa 293, 295, 313, 332
860



ri kho 421, 526
ri kho bsod nam rig 'dzin 526
ri khrod dkar po 137
ri khrod gong ma 371
ri khrod zhol ma 371
rigyong 385
rigo 444
ri rgan bum rdza 81, 82
rirgan bum rdza se mo 81
ri rgod 290
ri rgyal dgon 36
rinya 459
ri stod 433
ri mda 203, 444
ri nang 420, 452
ri nub 423, 425
ri sna 216
risnang 420, 425, 428,431, 434,436,439
ri pa 'brug geas 228, 229, 231
ri spun 383-385
ri spun dgon gyi lo rgyus 384,385
riba 358,506
ri bo sgang 257
ribo che 205
ri bo dpal 'bar 693
ri bo brag dkar 515, 516
ri bo rtse Inga 181
ri bo lha khang 515, 516
ri bla dar rgyas 384
ri bla ye shes 384
ridbang 249,621
ri ma 442, 506
ridmar 178, 211, 289
ridmar dbu lha btsan rgod 171
ri rtse 32, 495,652
ri rtse drug 168, 387
ri tshal phu pa 402
ri zhing 34, 38, 123, 208, 752
ri g-yang 381
rig 'dus tshogs 'khor 360
rig pa rang shar 565, 567
rig 'dzin kun bzang klong grol 275
rig'dzin rgya mtsho 73,515
rig 'dzin nyi ma 421, 424, 425
rig'dzin bstan srung 484-486
rig 'dzin don 'grub 476
861



rig 'dzin dran pa bdud 'dul 186, 188
rig 'dzin bde gshegs 'dus pa 369
rig 'dzin 'dus pa 187,423,745
rig'dzin 'dus pa sgrub skor 711
rig'dzin rdo rje 407
rig 'dzin nor bu 456
rig 'dzin bon 748
rigºdzin bon skor 286, 525, 681, 712
rig'dzin bon skor sgrub skor 712
rig 'dzin bon skyabs 748
rig'dzin dbang mo 745
rig 'dzin zangs skyong dbang po tshul khrims bstan'dzin 95
rig 'dzin g-yang skyob 113
rig 'dzin shar ba mal 'byor 474
rig'dzin gsang sgrub 134, 136
rigs Inga bde gshegs 'dus pa 369
rigs drug rang sbyong 598
ring mo 700
rin chen rgyal mtshan 29, 30, 167, 169, 190, 209, 397, 442, 482, 528, 568, 583, 591, 596,
597,612, 628, 653, 707, 709, 710, 749, 750
rin chen rgyal mtshan dar 167
rin chen bcu gsum 119, 121
rin chen gter mdzod 287
rin chen bstan'dzin 178
rin chen nor bu 264
rin chen mam rgyal618, 749
rin chen spungs 170,215
rin chen spungs pa 359, 362, 505
Tin chen phun tshogs 138, 169, 172
rin chen blo gros 152, 182.590, 615
rin chen dbang Idan 114, 406
rin chen 'bar ba 168, 170, 430
rin chen 'bar rdzong 567
rin chen tshul khrims 175, 230, 232, 615
rin chen tshe dbang 381
rin chen od zer 30, 183, 489, 582
rin chen Iha mo 122
rin chen Ihun grub 30, 273, 443, 525, 528, 565, 578, 583,612, 749
rin spung dbyar gnas 609
rin spungs 215, 608-611, 625, 634
rin spungs bkra shis smin grol gling 608, 611
rin spungs bkra shis smin grol gling gi gdan rabs nyung bsdus brjod pa tshangs pa'i dbyangs
snyan 611
rin spungs dbang rgyal 215
rin spungs shes rab seng ge 625
rin sprungs 631
862



ru tha 187, 190
ru tha ngang rdzong dgon 187
ru rdo 564
ru pha 179
ru lag 33, 35
rum mtsho rgan 156
rus sbal ser po 86
re mda 370
re ne 190
re pa 382
re mo 382
re wo 624
reb gong 273, 275, 276, 280-285, 287-289, 299, 313, 318, 336, 344, 346, 351, 352, 529,
575, 576
reb gong bon mang 275, 280-284, 287,318
ro wer 616
rong khams 359
rong sgom rtog med zhig po 330, 674
rong rtog med zhig po 673-675
rong ston shes rab 'od zer 42
rong pa 483
rong pad 'dzin 483
rong po dgon 153
rong bo 284, 299
rong brag 145, 364, 445, 474, 495, 497, 498, 501, 503, 505, 558, 661
rong mo za 166
rong ru 433
rong le 650
rol ong 593, 594
rwa lo tsa ba 330
rlung khog 385
rlung sgang 385
rlung rta bstod pa 362
rlung ra'i gar "dzugs 328
lung thun gcg bcad 365
rlung pa 430
rlob grong 496
La
la dkar bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan 5 15
la rked 421, 423
la rked stod 421
la rked smad 421
la sked 421
la kha 151, 267, 288, 296, 328, 433-435
la kha 'brug grags 434
863



la ga 281, 283, 300, 320, 616
la gong gi drag rtsal bcu gsum 119
la ngu 215, 216
la chen 614, 626
la tri hrirda 229
la tha 664
la dpyil rgyal mtshan 'od zer 183
la phu 40, 41, 131
la phug 40, 41, 131
la ba 498
la mo bde chen 313
la tsa khog 258
la ftse khog 249
la yas 623
la ri 151, 424
la lo 250
la shod 435
lag lab 257
lang 'ge 500
lang chen 647
lan sog sum mdo 365
lam mdo 358
lam lha 89, 149, 187, 189, 211
lam lha dgon g-yung drung gtam brag gling 187
las gshin nag po chen po 185
li dgu 626
li 'gu 483
li chu 468, 489
li thang 396, 489
li phru 564
li bal 172
li dbyin 626
li shu 79,96
li shu stag ring 176, 277.469, 471
lig mi rgyal 164
lu gu 424
lug ge 452
lug lung 595
lung dkar 130, 131, 136-139, 746
lung khug 502
lung dgu 583
lung rtogs skal bzang rgya mtsho 274, 275, 285, 286, 318, 320, 597
lung rtogs bstan pa'i nyi ma 29, 30, 736
lung nag 140
lung phug 445, 455
lung zhing nang 598
864



Index
lung bzang 137
| lung yul kha 267
lung ye 457
lung g-ye kha 267
lung rig grags rgyas 80
lung rig snyan grags 617,624
lung rig mam dag 377
le ltam pe 564
le dam 561
le dom 500
le lu 509
legs tang mang po 173
legs tang mang po 277
legs pa rgyal mtshan 560
legs lung 250
legs bshad rgya mtsho 557.558, 567
legs bshad rin chen gter khyim 331
lo god 455
lo mgo 382
lo rgyus gsol 'debs 420
lo pan mchod rten 74
lo dbu 433
lo dbyi 655
344
Sha
sha kya 332
sha rgya 299, 333, 344
sha rgya bon tshang ma 334
shargya g-yung drung rin chen
sha trog pa 560
sha ba 72, 77, 81, 154, 483
sha ba mtsho 495
shaba rang grol 77, 154
sha ba ri81
sha ba sang grol 72
sha mo 598, 616, 617
sha mo khag 598
sha ra thang 442
shari 80-82, 84, 115
shari dgon 80
shag chu 76, 78
shang blang drang srong 145
shang lang shod 436,439
shan co 499, 500
shan sde 500
sham po 73, 103, 144, 170
865



sham bha la 172
shar kha 516
shar khog 104, 251, 258, 527, 529, 590, 505-608, 611, 615, 620, 630, 631, 633, 645, 646,
648, 650, 652, 655
shar gling sham po lha rtse 73
shar rgya stag khra bo 114
shar steng 318-324
shar dung ri 607, 645
shar pa moal 'byor 384,711
shar pa rnal "byor gyi mam thar 711
sharphyogs 318, 400, 467
shar ba khri skyang 251
shar rtse khang 75
shar tshang 287, 290
shar tshang skal Idan rgya mtsho 287
shar rdza 124, 132, 139, 184-187, 253, 255, 285, 345, 351, 359, 360, 364, 367-373,
375-380, 382, 399, 402-405, 408, 415, 416, 420, 421, 423, 425-428, 430, 432, 433,
435, 437-440, 444, 452, 453, 457-459, 467, 469, 470, 473,475, 483, 486, 490, 491,
497, 521, 551, 561, 585, 588, 598, 627, 667, 673, 741
shar rdza ba chen po bkra shis rgyal mtshan dpal bzang po'i mam par thar pa 373,667
shar rdza g-yung drung lhun po 370
shar rdza ri khrod 359, 360, 364, 365, 372, 376, 379, 423
shar rdza'i Iding khrom 359
sharwa 607, 614, 617,624
shar lung 327
shi glo'u tshang 328
shi cu drung mu 209
shi mda 650
shing 'bras 257
shing bzo 579,592
shing bzo ba kha 579
shing rong 211
shing las 491
shu ku 551
shug sgang 455
shug steng kha 257
shug sdong skal bzang phun tshogs 422, 437
shug rdzong 217
shug ri nyi shar 706, 707, 709
shug ri nyi sharri khrod 706, 707
shugs chen 203
she co 499, 500
she tsu drung mu 30
she long 433, 436
she long glang chen 433,436
shel sku 84, 114, 116-118, 227, 228
866



shel sku khro bo rgyal mtshan 84, 116
shel sku bla brang 118
shel sku sbug 227, 228
shel rgya shel zhig dbu dkar 178
shel sgo dgon pa 262
shel gnag 588
shel phug 81, 95, 96, 596,599
shel phug skyang tshang 596
shel phug hun grub bstan 'dzin 599
shel bod 609
shel brag 95, 96, 181, 182, 441
shel brag dri med dngos dga' 182
shel brag phug pa 95
shel brag gshen bstan dri med gling 181
shel bla 116, 117
shel bla khro bo rgyal mtshan 117
shel bla smon lam bkra shis 116
shel bla g-yung drung rgyal mtshan 117
shel sbug117
shel tshang 116
shel zhig 105, 106, 117, 124, 178, 228
shel zhig g-yung drung mam rgyal 124
shel ri stag gsum 562
shel le rdzong drug 181
shes Iding 113
shes pa 565
shes rab kun gsal 566,623, 624
shes rab bkra shis 401
shes rab grags 33, 132
shes rab grags pa 33, 132
shes rab rgyal ba 528
shes rab rgyal mtshan 29, 31, 32, 35, 39, 45, 73, 88, 110, 122, 131, 140, 151, 152, 164, 165,
169, 173, 174, 216, 217, 219, 222, 223, 230-232, 255, 276, 287, 320, 351, 369, 374,
376, 378, 380, 397-399, 416, 423, 431, 432, 442.459, 467, 481, 483, 486, 491, 496,
497, 499, 527, 529, 530, 533 561, 563, 566, 568, 584.585, 590, 594. 595, 598, 606,
609, 613, 616, 625, 629, 632, 646, 651, 654, 672, 673, 675, 681, 693, 704, 707-711,
716, 732, 737, 743, 750
shes rab sgom 164
shes rab dngos gru 263
shes rab nyi ma 565, 701, 708, 709, 713
shes rab bstan rgyas 594
shes rab bstan pa dar rgyas 594
shes rab bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan 33, 34, 736, 738
shes rab bstan pa'i nyi ma 34
shes rab bstan pa'i zla ba 274, 277, 668
shes rab bstan 'phel 619
867



shes rab bstan'dzin 30, 96, 209, 253, 378, 429, 568, 591, 593, 594, 612, 622, 628, 634,
699, 705
shes rab bstandzin (rgyal mtshan) 96
shes rab bstan'dzin dgon pa 705
shes rab bstan 'dzin rgyal mtshan 96
shes rab mthar phyin 631, 635
shes rab ram rgyal 273, 332, 609
shes rab phun tshogs 130, 133, 136, 179, 253, 359, 378, 714
shes rab byams ma 88, 89, 185, 331
shes rab blo gros 29, 30, 156, 274, 490, 528, 612, 646,715, 736, 738
shes rab blo Idan 33, 34, 96, 177, 532
shes rab dbang rgyal 30, 363, 468, 528, 587, 597
shes rab dbang Idan 482, 565
shes rab dbang phyug 263
shes rab shyin pa 383
shes rab smra ba'i seng ge 185
shes rab gtsug rgyan 624
shes rab tshul khrims 485, 563, 569
shes rab 'od zer 30, 42, 175, 484, 528, 567,597, 605, 611, 612, 622, 750, 751
shes rab ye shes S07, 608,609
shes rab g-yung drung 30, 44, 73, 81, 133, 155, 274, 397. 556, 596
shes rab g-yung drung bstan pa'i sgron me 274
shes rab seng ge 139, 144, 359, 482, 490, 625
shes rab lha rtse 630
shog Inga 188, 189, 211
shog tog 616,617
shog mthor 377
shod chen bco brgyad 420
shod tram phug pa 106
shod pa 523
shod ring 441
shod ru 445
shwa mdzo gnyan po dkar phyogs 366
gshin rje gshed dmar 145
gshin rje lha dgu 458
gshed dmar 145, 168, 183, 185, 402
gshen khri 746
gshen gyi gar 'cham 733, 737
gshen gyi dge spyod mam par dag pa'i mdo 733
gshen gyi mnal 'byor ba 732
gshen rgyal bstan dzin 560
gshen rgyal ba 'od zer 439
gshen chen klu dga 36, 120, 123, 272
gshen chen klu dga' 36, 120, 123, 186, 272
gshen chen klubdud brag dkar gyi bsang yig ha ri'i ljon bzang 624
gshen chen dran pa nam mkha' 240
868



gshen nyi ma rgyal mtshan 36, 107
gshen bstan rgyal mtshan 429
gshen bstan nyi ma 'bum gling 622.624
gshen bstan ram rgyal lha rtse gling 501
gshen bstan 8-yung drung gling 152
gshen bstan g-yung drung bde chen gling 78, 145
gshen bstan g-yung drung nor bu dar rgyas gliny 617,620
gshen bstan rin chen gling 136
gshen dar sding 368, 399,439, 465
gshen nam mkha' snang ba mdog can 396
gshen bha da bhi sha his 748
gshen mi 'gyur btsug phud 750
gshen mu la blo gros 396
gshen tsha glang thar 253
gshen tshang 439
gshen tshad med 'od ldan 749
gshen bza' dpal 'dzin 144
gshen rab 31, 32, 37, 73-75, 79, 83, 84, 88, 104, 105, 111, 113, 120, 121, 124, 138, 145, 146,
152, 154, 155, 169, 177, 180, 182, 185, 186, 188, 202, 203, 205, 210, 215-219, 222,
223, 226, 228-231, 254, 361, 387, 399, 469, 474. 483, 499, 530, 562-564, 653, 661,
691,733, 738, 743, 750
gshen rab dgu 'cham 32, 483, 499
gshen rab rgyal 562, 564
gshen rab sgrub mchod 530
gshen rab 'dod pa dgu 'gyur 750
gshen rab rnam par rgyal ba 83
gshen rab dbang rgyal 563
gshen rab mi bo 37, 73, 83, 121, 124, 138, 361, 387, 399, 469, 474, 499, 530, 653, 661,
733, 738
gshen ri bde Idan 227
gshen sras grags pa 77
gshen gsang ba 'dus pa 81, 176
gshen gsangs ba 'dus pa 121
gshen lha 74, 76, 84, 88, 113, 121, 138, 148, 185, 186, 188, 203-205, 210, 569
gshen tha 'od dkar 74, 76, 84, 88, 113, 121, 138, 148, 185, 186, 188, 203-205, 210, 569
gsher gyi gar 'cham 733, 737
gshel lo 421
bshad grwa 285, 379, 436, 439, 731-733
bshad sgrub bstan rgyas bkra shis g-yung drung gling 420
bshad sgrub rab brtan gling 434
bshad sgrub rab 'phel 140
bshes pa 382
bshes yes dbon po 565
Sa
sa dkar
249, 266
869



sa dkar sgang 249
sa skya 141, 202, 368, 442, 476
sa skya bdag chen 442
sa skya pa 71, 249, 358, 383, 396, 424
sa ge g-yung drung ye shes 104
sa gru bzhi 353
sa rgya ma yum bu dgos 'dzom 749
sa sgang 181, 189
sa snga rong 516
sa cha 654
sa stod 433
sa bdag 'khrugs bcos 369
sa bdag nye lam sde bzhi 733
sa mdo 191
sa 'dul khro 'cham 75
sa nag 427
sa nag stod 427
sa nag shod 427
sa ba kyo 559
sa bla 216
sa blu li 489
sa dbus 648, 650
sa dbus bkra shis phun tshogs gling 648
sa dbus g-yung drung 'phel rgyas dgon 648
sa 'brug 624, 626
sa 'brug dgon pa dpal gshen bstan kun gsal smin grol gling gi tho yig dkar chags 626
sa 'brug gshen bstan kun gsal smin grol gling 624
sa me 561
sa dmar 459
sa smad 433
sa 'u 648
sa 'ug 648
sa ya 473
sa yi brag ri sgor mo 175
sa yul 648, 650
sa yul dgon pa'i lo rgyus mdor bsdus 650
sa yo 564
sa ral 589, 590, 592
sa re 473
sa lam 529
sa sho mda 175
sa so 438, 441
sang dga' 458,460
sang dga' g-yung drung bstan'dzin 458
sang rgyas gling pa 439
sang rgyas dpal Idan 661
870



sang rgyas sman lha'i cho ga 'bring po 331
sang rgyas tshul khrims 653
sangs gling nga 'dra ma 185
sangs gling pad ma gar dbang 185
sangs rgyas 30, 87, 88, 135, 147, 155, 407, 465, 556, 557, 560, 692, 711, 715,736, 738
sangs rgyas gling pa 120, 121, 170, 182-186, 375, 424, 428, 459,498,583
sangs rgyas rgya misho 352
sangs rgyas bstan'dzin 30, 122, 147, 557, 560, 583, 692, 715,736, 738
sangs rgyas bstan 'dzin dbang gi rgyal po 122
sangs rgyas sman bla 182
sangs rgyas 'od zer 556
sangs po 131
sad ne ga'u 102, 103, 118
si khron zhing chen mnga ba bod rigs rang skyong khul tan phing rdzong gi sa cha'i ming
btus 645
sire 626
siddhi bon sgrub 522
su mgo 219
su tshang 431, 432
su tshang stod pa 431,432
su tshang nam mkha'rgyal mtshan 431
su tshang nam mkha'tshul khrims 432
su la 431-434, 443
su la skal bzang bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan 432
su la tshang 432, 443
sum ston'dul ba bzang po 42
sum bcu pa 254
sum ston bzang po dpal 42
sum ston lha 'bum 42
sum pa 110, 119, 130, 164
sum pa glang gi gyim shod 164
sum pa'istong bu chung 119
se skong 328
se skong tshang 328
se kho nam mkha' dbang phyug 203
se kho ra ma mkha' spyod 203
se nam mkhathogs med 203
se bon 'khro rgyal 673
se mo thang 228
se mo do 70
se mo rdzing 'gag 556
se mo g-yu rtse 377
se zhig skor Ide 105
se zhig mu la thogs med 203
se ra 368
se ri 500
871



seng ge dkar mo 484
seng ge gling grags 590
seng ge rgyab bsnol 467
seng ge thod pa 617
seng ge blo gros 442
seng ge gtsang po 240
seng ge g-yu rtse 184
seng gerlung rta 276
seng Icam 'brug mo 181
seng chen 362, 505
seng thod ma 183
seng gdong ma 121, 147, 182, 402
sen ge gnam rdzong 115
Sen tsha 110-112, 123
sen tsha dga' ri 112
sen tsha dgon 110
sen tsha zhu tshang g-yang shod dgon 111
sems dpa' gsal 744
sems sbyong 365
ser skya dgon 380
ser grong 291
ser brgya 275
ser tsha 179, 180
ser zhig 102, 104-107
so brgyad 147
so brgyad mkhan po 147
so nag 273, 274,315
so nag grub chen thog 'dzin 273
so fag gsas khang 274
so mang 524
so tshang 328
so ri 523
so lha khyabril 329
S0g rting ngu bon đgon 84
sog sde 164, 253, 330, 335, 337
sog po 588
sog po stag btsan 497
sog po ri rtse 495
sog tsan dan dgon 137
sog btsun grags pa rgyal mtshan 331
sog btsun ston pa 330, 331
sog btsun ye shes rgyal mtshan 335
sog rdzong 113
sog g-yung drung gling 119, 120, 136-138. 151
sog g-yung drung 'dzin pa'i gling 77
srange 624
872



Index
sra ti 624
sra bstan mi 'gyur 631
sram dkar khyung ba 89
sras smyon pa 148
sras lha rje skyid po 272
sri skyabs 509
sri thar 154
srid rgyal dgon chen 112, 228
srid rgyal dgon pa 714
srid rgyal dus drug 75
srid rgyal drel nag 134, 149, 156, 228
srid rgyal drel nag ma 134
srid rgyal drel dmar 134, 149, 166, 186, 204, 205, 361,546
srid rgyal drel dmar gyi tshogs 'khor 361
srid rgyal bla mtsho 156
srid dar mam rgyal 750
srid pa rgyal mo 95, 153, 169, 208, 210, 218, 222, 228, 229, 287, 465, 475, 515,693
srid pa rgyal mo drel nag 77
srid pa rgyal mo drel dmar 152
srid pa rang grags 183
srid pa'i rgyal mo 74
srid gsum dbang bsgyur 80
srin po 328, 329
srin po'i pad ma dbang rgya 329
srin mo phug 227
srib ga kha 267
srib gru kha 215
srib Ita 320
srib mda* 178
srib pa 257
srib phyogs 695
srung ma'i sgrub thabs 274
srung zlog bsad gsum 256
srog tsha 328
srog Iha gangs dkar 171
srong btsan sgam po 110, 119
slog brgya 328
slob dpon bka' thang 256
slob dpon zil gnon 747
slob zur tshul khrims bstan 'dzin 528
gsang gling 227
gsang sngags grags pa 367, 455
gsang sngags gling pa 84, 138, 139, 184, 186, 345, 359, 362, 369, 370, 378, 404, 423, 427,
428, 432-435, 437, 439, 440, 444, 464, 467, 490-492, 502
gsang sngags theg chen g-yung drung gling 44
gsang sngags ma rgyud 369
873



gsang sngags smin grol theg chen gling 575
gsang sngags smin grol dar rgyas gling 250
gsang sngags rtse 90
gsang good yid bzhin nor bu 274, 276
gsang gcod yid bzhin nor bu'i chu 'grim dmigs skor 274
gsang mchog 135, 183, 421, 567, 628
gsang mchog gnas chen bya dur gyi bsang mchod 628
gsang tmchog Tig pa khu byug 183
gsang mchog rol pa 183
gsang drag 232, 256, 712
gsang drag sgrub skor 712
gsang bdag mkhar rtse 345
gsang 'dus zhi khro 430
gsang phug 472, 481
gsang ba mchog Idan 442
gsang ba drag chen 360
gsang ba 'dus pa 81, 176, 186
gsang brag nor bu lha rtse 138
gsa' mda bon dgon 110, 119. 121-124
gsa' phu 115, 119, 124
gsa' phu mgon lha dkar po 119
gsa' bu mdzod 'chang smug mo 120
gsa'yar kha 120
gsa'yi nor bu bcu gsum 121
gsa' lung mda' 119
gsar 'phar 125
gsal gong 380
gsal chu 605
gsal ba od chung 565, 567
gsal ba 'od chen 565, 567
gsas khang kun 'dus g-yung drung 'gyur med gliny 295
gsan khang kha bsted 89
gsas khang khyung dkar bstan pa rgya mtsho gling 300
gsas khang khyung dkar smin grol rig 'dzin gling 297
gsas khang rgyal bstan ye shes rgya mtsho gling 292
gsas khang sgrub pa'i rgyal mtshan mi gyur gling 296
gsas khang theg chen bon 'khor lhun grub gling 290
gsas khang theg chen smin grol rgya mtsho gling 292
gsas khang mdo sngags phun tshogs dar rgyas gling 294
gsas khang g-yung drung bstan dar gling 289
gsas khang rig 'dzin kun 'dus rnam rgyal gling 300
gsas khang rig 'dzin thugs rje byang chub gling 293
gas khang goatig srngags bdud "dul 298, 316, 321, 352
gsas khang gsang sngags bdud 'dul gling 318,321, 352
gsas khang gsang sngags bdud 'dul lhun grub gling 298
gsas khang gsang sngags rig 'dzin dar rgyas gling 291
874



Index
gsas khang gsang chen smin grol dpal ldan gling 299
gsas mkhar 73, 121, 124, 132, 142, 147, 265, 369, 434, 534, 635,647, 652
gsas mkhar bcu drug 73
gsas mkhar mchog Inga 121, 124, 132, 142, 147, 369, 434
gsas mkhar nor bu 652
gsas mkhar lha ri snying po 265
gsas sar nam mkha' g-yung drung 173
gsung rab skyabs 672, 743
gsung rab 'bum 743, 748
gsum dga'rab rdzong 676
gsum zer 496
gse dal gnam Icags thog rgod 366
gseng khang 185
gser rko 619
gser sku byis drod ma 113
gser skyems 466, 483
gstr khang 289, 594, 611, 615
gser khang thod 289
gser khang rin chen 615
gser gling 95, 622
gser gling mtsho 95
gser sgo khra mo 36
gser ngu g-yu mtsho 384
gser chen sangs rgyas gling pa 375
gser chos zho 'bru skar tsheg 117
gser thang 258, 691
gser thar 375
gser gdung khang 185, 188
gser mda 366
gser mdo bo che 366
gser nag rta mgo bcu gsum 75
gher phu 403
gser mtsho 607, 617,645
gser gzhung 318,321
gser gzhong 250-253, 255, 257, 259, 265, 266
gser 'od nor bu 'od 'bar 660, 712
gser 'od 'bar ba 154
gser 'od gzugs chen nyi ma shar 'bum 89
gser ti dkar po 516
gser ru 165
gser lung 366
gser shul 481
gser so can 252
bsang gi dag gtsang sngon 'gro'i rim pa 705
bsang po ja 711
bsam grub nyi ma 701, 702
875



bsam gling 675, 691, 692, 697-699, 702, 703, 709, 713
HUE
bsam 'grub dgon pa 468
bsam 'grub nyi ma 705, 706, 709
bsam grub do dam tshan khag 596
bsam gtan rgyal ba 263
bsam glan rgyal mtshan 173, 183
bsam gtan phun tshogs 560
bsam gtan tshul khrims 149, 178,210
bsam 'phel nor bu 154
bsam yas 595
bsam lhun sgrub skor 430
bsam lhun sgrub chen 430
bsu 'go 467
bse ba drung ram pa shes rab phun tshogs 253
bse ru 149, 150, 406
bse ru'i mgo 406
bse shang 261
bsod nam bstan'dzin S60
bsod nams bkra shis 154, 168, 397
bsod nams grags pa 124, 209
bsod nams rgya mtsho 619
bsod nams rgyal po 401
bsod nams rgyal mtshan 137-139, 166, 173, 277, 330, 381, 401, 490, 528, 556, 568, 583,
597,618,715, 744
bsod nams chos rgyal 113, 152
bsod nams chos 'phel 409
bsod nams nyi ma 565, 628
bsod nams bstan rgyal 634
bsod nams bstan 'dzin 582, 597
bsod nams dar rgyas 252, 274
bsod nams mam rgyal 426
bsod nams phun tshogs 30, 523, 579,587
bsod nams blo gros 30, 184, 379, 429, 484, 565, 568
bsod nams blo gros dbang gi rgyal po 184
bsod nams dbang grags 132, 367, 587
bsod nams dbang rgyal 167, 184, 403, 407, 417,436, 482, 489
bsod nams dbang 'dus 154
bsod nams 'bum 589
bsod nams tshul khrims 623
bsod nams tshe ring 434,436
bsod nams bzang po 407, 590, 615
bsod nams 'od zer 429
bsod nams ye shes 30, 113, 139, 174, 442, 596
bsod nams yon tan 557
bsod nams g-yung drung 30, 81, 101, 138, 142, 152, 156, 273, 274, 318, 319, 321, 350,
352, 407, 455, 560, 700
876



Index
bsod nams lha rgyal 111, 379
bsod nams lhun grub 81, 82, 137
bslab gsum phun tshogs 401
bslab gsum tshul khrims 577
Ha
ha phan 630
ha mes 614
ha smin (mes) g-yong dga' 614
ha mtsho 261
hali 655
ha shang 75, 80
hal po gdong 70
hum chen 184, 186, 359, 360,363, 368, 437,741
hum chen 'gro 'dul gling pa 184, 363, 741
he dga' 655
he la nam mkha'i 'phur mo che 123
ho 137,257, 523, 530, 614, 624
ho tsa 530
ho tse 624
ho tsha 523
hori 257
hong yuan 575
hor 31, 33, 35, 40, 71, 78, 83, 110, 111, 122, 123, 130, 132, 136, 137, 143-147, 149-151.
153, 154, 172, 174, 184, 189, 191, 252, 277, 281, 283, 299, 328, 331, 365, 366, 375,
396, 443, 445, 454, 457, 469, 523, 530, 546, 610, 615, 616, 620, 633, 667
hor stong skor 620
hor mthong 610
hor nag 281, 283, 299
hor nag byams pa rgyal 299
hor nag a myes byams pa rgyal 299
hor spo 396
hor spyi khyab 71, 110, 331, 365
hor spyi khyab rgyal po 331, 365
hoc phan 523
hor 'phen 530
hor sbra chen 83, 130, 151
hor btsun bstan'dzin blo gros 252, 277,615, 616, 633,667
hor btsun bstan 'dzin blo gros rgya mtsho 277,615, 616,667
hor tshang 328
hortshul khrims nyi ma 149
hor ye tha 132, 136, 137
hor ra bdud 'dul 469
hor lan stod 365
hyo pa 383
lha skyabs 445, 557
877



Iha bskyed nang gsal 69
Nha khang 33, 74, 79, 83, 87, 88, 96, 153, 170, 185, 240, 273, 275, 285, 300, 330, 335, 337,
358, 363, 385, 420, 421, 423, 515, 516, 522, 590, 648, 661,671, 706, 707,710, 712
Tha khang thang 421
Iha khang gdong 648
lha khang mdo 423
Iha khyung 151, 164, 562, 564, 568, 569
lha khyung rgyal 151
lha mkhar 144
tha mkhar bstan rgyal 144
lha dge 141
lha mgon 118
lha rgod 135, 144, 148, 155, 360, 385, 420, 425, 481, 744, 746-748, 750
Iha rgod skyabs 744
Iha rgod thog pa 135
lha rgod 'bum 747, 748
Iha rgyab 699
Iha rgyal 'phags 386
lha lcam khan pa 70
Tha chen 69, 378
Tha chen skyes bu bzhin bzang 69
lha chen rdo rje 'bar ba rtsal 69
Iha mchog tshangs pa chen po 69
lha rje skyen ga yu 120
lha gnyan g-yung drung rtse 232
lha brtan pad ma mam rgyal 456
lha thog 83, 85, 118, 147
lha mthong 176
Iha sding 556
lha bu spa ba spa thog 131
lha brag 153, 154
Tha bla bstan pa phun tshogs 145
iha dbang 72, 147, 560
lha dbang dgra 'du! 147
Iha dbang batan 'dzin 560
Iha mo rang grags 183
Iha btsun dkar po 276
lha yi blo gros 363, 374
Tha g-yag 223, 483
Tha g-yag dkar po 223
Iha ri gyang tho 227, 253
Tha ri dardzin 534
lha ri spang mtho 72
Ihari ya ma 172
Iha ri g-yu rtse 172
lha rig pa blo gros mam rgyal 629
878



lha ru 189
Tha lug tshul khrims 452
lha lung 122, 144, 146, 164, 189
lha lung rgyal 164
Iha sa 608
Tha gsan khang 364
Ihun grub grags pa 132, 155
Thun grub rgya mtsho 169, 173, 275, 276, 281, 286, 288, 327, 336, 576, 666, 668
lhun grub rgyal mtshan 177, 181, 209, 527,615
thun grub sgang 208
Ihun grub bstan 'dzin 596,599
lhun grub dpal bzang 482, 490
Thun grub 'phrin las 151
Thun grub dbang rgyal 117, 230, 232, 481, 489, 653
lhun grub dbang Idan 85-88.404, 528
Ihun grub tshul khrims 407, 436
lhun grub bzhi 174
Thun grub 'od zer 87. 145
Thun grub 'od gsal zla gzhon gling 522
lhun grub bsod nams dbang rgyal 167
Ihun po brtsegs mdo 182
Iho kha 233
lho 'gro mgon gyi lo rgyud (rgyus) udpal'i 'phreng mdzes rjes 'brang blo gsal gyi mgul
rgyan 492
Iho rtogs Idan dkar po 85
lho nub 507
lho yang ston 330
Tho rong rdzong 205, 208, 211
a ka 523, 530
a krong 141, 142
a dkar 125, 133, 140, 156, 170, 359.416
a dkar bum sgrub 133, 140, 156, 416
a skal 251, 254, 257, 266, 668
a skya 576
a skyid 142, 26, 263, 264, 582, 58, 585-587, 590, 599, 606, 616, 620, 644, 649
a skyid skyang tshang 261, 263, 264, 582, 586,587, 590, 599, 606, 616, 644, 649
a skyid skyang tshang dgon bkra shis g-yung drung dar rgyas gling gi byung ba cung zad
brjod pa 586
a skyid skyang tshang 8-yung drung bstan rgyas gling 582
a skyid grog 585
a skyid stod 585
a skyid nor bu gling 620
a skyid g-yung drung bstan rgyas gling 583
a khams rin chen dar rgyas 532
879



a khu bstan rgyal tshang 587
a khu sprul sku 415, 416
a khu brug yag 634
a khu tshe dbang 505
a khu ye shes 465, 557
a khod 363,366
a khrid 374, 399, 529, 705, 732
a khrid nyams rgyud 705
a mkhar 331, 615
a mkhas tshang 583
ago 564
a gling brag dkar 607
a dga 434,436
a mgalsku zhabs 503
a mgon 273, 318
a mgon bla ma 273, 318
a 'ga'sku zhabs 507, 508
a 'grub 588
arga steng 280, 290
a rgya 153, 164,422, 424
a rgyal 422, 424
a rngul 'bri ri phyung mo 152
a sngags khyung tshang 620
a sngags rgyal mtshan 615
a lcam u gu 229
a chig 76
a mchod ge khod 81
a 'jab 76
a "jigs 372
a rje 491
a nyin 559
a ti mu wer 135, 152, 750
a tog rtogs Idan 612
a rta 249, 375
a rta srib 249
a rten 397
a sta khang tshan che ba 434
a stag khang tshan 364
a stong 610
a stod 72, 78
a thang rtswa zan 562
a dam 252
a don 401
a drung 174, 209, 597
a drung tshul khrims dga' ba 130
a bdud lhun 'grub rdo rje 469
880



Index
a 'dus 534
a rdo 252, 438, 441, 503, 593
a nag dbang chen 253
a nu 'phrag thag 102
a pa 116, 630
a phyug 358
a bu bsam med 115
a byang tshang 583
a brag 71, 73, 75, 77
a brag spyi ba grags pa 77
a bla snang gsal 73
a dbang 73
a 'bi bla ma 485
a 'be tshul khrims 465
a 'ben 630
a ma pad mo 233
a ma yu mo 228
a myes rgya thang 300
a myes rgyal po 380
a myes gnyan steng 294
a myes rten 'gyings 300
a myes thugs rje 294
a myes dung dkar 350
a myes ba yan 346
a myes bon sgang 289
a myes brag dkar 534
a myes machen 502
a myes so ye 289
a smad 77
a tsa ra 75
a btsan 614
a tshan 398
a tshab 396
a tshogs tshang 583, 586
a 'dzin 507
a 'dzul 441
a zha 249, 259, 489, 492, 591, 592
a zha khog 249
a bze 252
a ya sbug ge 154
a yag tshang 328
a yung 421-423, 427, 430, 437, 459, 508
a g-yung 368, 369, 425, 460
a ra ka co 475
a rig stong skor gsas khang 343, 353
a ro 257
881



a brla 151, 166
a la pe 500
a lag sho 561
a lags 272-274, 318, 330-333
a lags khyung mo 330, 331
a lags pad ma 273, 318
a lags shes rab 272, 273, 332
a lung blo gros rgyal mtshan 469
a lo 72, 83, 96, 164, 655, 664
a sharblo gros 442, 443
a shar zhing 443
a shes 594
a gas 263, 327
a bse 77, 105, 111, 149, 153, 156, 328.406, 579
a bsod tshang 587
amitabha 285
u rgyan 172
u dum btsan 284
u ribsod nams rgyal mtshan 139
uggling 459
un chen dur krod nor bu spungs ri72
ur rti 350, 351, 353
e 'dzin 588
en 'dzi 251-253, 262, 265
en 'dzin mtsho 'dus 251
en 'dzi i nyinti 253
en 'dzi'i snya bza' 252
orgyan 70, 110, 181, 436, 469, 558
orgyan chos gling 110
orgyan thug rje gling pa 469
orgyan mam grol 436
orgyan phug 70
om thog kha 188
or sgom kun dul 673
882



List of Authors
Samten G. Karmay
Directeur de Recherche émérite, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Paris
SamKarmay@aol.com
Yasuhiko Nagano
Professor of Linguistics, National Museum of Ethnology, Osaka
nagano@idc.minpaku.ac.jp
Tsering Thar
Associate Professor of Tibetan Religion, China Center for Tibetan Studies, Beijing
tsering@95777.com
Phuntso Tsering Sharyul
Ex-Director and Professor emeritus, Tibet Academy of Social Sciences, Lhasa
Dondrup Lhagyal
Associate Professor of Tibetan Studies, Tibet Academy of Social Sciences, Lhasa
dondrup@public.ls.xz.cn
Charles Ramble
Lecturer in Tibetan and Himalayan Studies, The Oriental Institute, University of Oxford
charles.ramble@oriental-institute.oxford.ac.uk
Marietta Kind
Lecturer in Anthropology, University of Zurich
kind@access.unizh.ch
883



[国立民族学博物館刊行物審查委员会]
毛直道館長
杉田繁治 企画調整官
石森秀三民族社会研究部
熊倉功夫民族文化研究部
栗田靖之博物館民族学研究部
中牧弘元先端民族学研究部
長野奈民族学研究開発センター(出版委員長)
押川文子地域研究企画交流センター
平成15年3月28日発行
非秀品
国立民族学博物館調查報告 38
# # Samten G. Karmay
Yasuhiko Nagano
堯 行国立民族学博物館
了565-11 吹田市千里万博公國104-1
TEL ( 1712151(代表)
印刷株式会社 遊文舎
〒532-0012 大阪市淀川区木川東4-17-31
TEL. TRY (63041932;



Senri Ethnological Reports
38
ISSN 1340-6787
ISBN 4-901906-10-0
C3039
